This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.
It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.
Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.
Usage  guidelines
Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:
+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for personal,  non-commercial  purposes.
+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.
+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.
+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe.
About  Google  Book  Search
Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web
at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/
Vqim,  m,  KJ*.     Pmc?  2».
l{UDim!lMT/r*Y  TRKATISJB
POWER  OF  WATE
xl,
•  =>    ^J^Pimf^   TO    JiriVE    F?.{>ni   MTllR,   Airri   f    OlVTll    MfVftOS    TO
WITH  'iLUn^-'*^*<*»^*, t         ^   _^   ^   ^
inciV^^Gl
f^arliartr  CoUese  Hibrarg.
the  library  of Professor   E.   W.   GURNEY,
(Class  of  1853).
Received  ia  MajM  18981
ry-cCT  f  y?>?C5  ^y-,ii(7)  x^y-^f^  wyv«:?3  ^risfrj  frit>nj  fr^c?)  'f .
K
^      VIBTU£  BBOTHEHS  *  CO.,  1,  Amen  Comer,  Faterooster  Bow.      T--'^
;5J  -A.  Budimentary  Treatise  on  ^€'^
'^      THE  DRAINAGE  OF  DI8TEICT8  AHD  lAHDS.
fe^^j.  By  G.  DRYSDAXE  DEMPSEY,  OJ!.  ^^^
'^^i-  Illustrated.    Price  Is.  ^j?^'
%4  —  tJ^
K
.  ;&5-                                   A  Budimentary  Treatise  on  ^  ^  ^
^'^^  WELL  DIGGING,  BORING,  AND  PITM]?  WORK  &?%'
^^^              By  JOHN  GEORGE  SWINDELL,  K.I.B.A.  Aflsoe.  io^i
Ft^                               KeTiaedbyG..R.  BuRNKLL,  CJS.  f^^
^5^                                       Illustrated.    Price  l8.  St    ^
r^2
Jp$i               Rudiments  of  the  Art  of  Constructing  and  Repairing  Si:^^''
^^                      •         COMMON   ROADS,  dj^j
^          And  a  General  Suryey  of  the  Principal  Metropolitan  Boads.  '^o^i
^^                                              Together  with  '^^^i Additional  Remarks  on  the  Maintenance  of  Macadamised  Boads.    *rJY^.
By  Gen.  Sib  JOHN  F.  BUBGOYNE,  Bart.,  &c.  c^^l
[i-t^                                  Illustrated.    Price  Is.  6cl.  ^t^c^^
e^^  ■  '  .       —    ■  m
L-^ff                                   An  Elementary  Treatise  on  ^fi'^t
oig         LAND  AND  ENGINEERING  SURVEYING,  '^^\
i,^                          With  all  the  Modern  Improvements.  ^vlT^t
'^•&^    '     Arranged  for  the  use  of  Schools  and  Private  Students,  also  for  ^  i^^
'^~                          Practical  Land  Surveyors  and  Engineers.  TC?^^
Illustrated.  2s.   •  o!:M^l
'By  T.  BAKER,  CJ).  ^V^'
K^^                                         .    Illustrated.  2s.    '  ^^^
c^                                                ■  '  ii"^'
§^^  p                                   A  Rudimentary  Treatise  on  c^^l^
^^-      AGRICULTURAL  ENGINEERING  iUILDINGS;  :^j^^;
^^c^   Motive  Powers  and  Machinery  of  the  Steading ;  Field  Machines  and  "-^^
IS^-^                                             Improvements.  %^^-
^'%                                 By  G.  ,H.  ANDREWS,  C.E.  i^c^^
^J^'                                            Illustrated.    3s.  5S.%^
l^^   .    --'-
X^;^^^      ViRTTJE  BBOTHERS  &  CO.,  1,  Amen  Comer,  Paternoster  Row.  j  ;<r ^#^  ^^  >«fe^  >Kfe^  ii^^  ^^  Mi^Mic^
^a/Ma^M^
EUDIMENTAEY  TREATISE
THE   POWER   OF   WATER.
e
RUDIMENTARY  TREATISE
POWER  OF  WATER.
AS  APPLIED  TO  DRIVE  FLOUE  MILLS,  AND  TO  GIVE  MOTION  TO TURBINES  AND  OTHER  HYDROSTATIC  ENGINES.
JOSEPH  GLYNN,  F.R.S.
Member  of  the  Institntion  of  Civil  Engineers,  Ac.    Honorary  Member  of  tlie  Philosophical Society,  Newcastle-upon-Tyne,  etc.
WITH    ILLUSTRATIONS,
AKD
AN  APPENDIX  ON  CENTRIFUGAL  AND  ROTARY  PUMPS.
""      LONDON : JOHN   WEALE,  59,  HIGH  HOLBOEN.
1853.
Harvard  College  Librar^J
219  June  ]891.
Prom  the  Library  ot
Frof.   El  Wi  GURNEY:
LONDON: BRADBURY  AND  BVANS,    PRINTERS,    WHITEFBIAR8.
TO  THE  BIGHT  HONOUBABLE
THE   EARL   OF   ROSSE,  K.P.
FBB8IDBNT  OF  THX  &OTAL  80CIKTT.
IS  MOST  RE^ECTFULLY  DEDICATED.
PREi'ACE.
Some  of  the  most  pleasant  days  of  the  author's  early  life were  passed  on  a  small,  but  picturesque  estate  belonging  to his  family,  on  which  were  three  com  mills — one  driven  by wind,  and  two  by  water.  To  his  youthful  associations  with these  and  their  tenants  may  in  part  be  owing  his  attachment to  mechanical  pursuits.  Subsequently  his  father  was  induced, as  an  investment,  to  build,  on  other  property,  a  flour-mill driven  by  steam,  to  which,  during  its  erection,  he  was  a  daily visitor.
In  after  life  his  professional  employment  as  a  civil engineer  frequently  involved  the  construction  of  water- wheels,  many  of  them  on  a  large  scale,  for  drainage  and irrigation,  and  for  motive  power,  besides  hydraulic  works  of various  kinds.
Pew  persons  have  had  occasion  to  use  the  steam-engine more  extensively,  and  he  is  fully  sensible  of  its  great  valuie and  importance  as  a  prime  mover  for  machinery ;  yet  he has  often  felt  that  water-power  has  been  unduly  superseded or  neglected  when  it  might  have  been  usefully  employed ; there  are  many  places  where  fuel  is  scarce,  where  water abounds,  and  where  mechanical  power  is  wanted,  but  much expense  cannot  be  afforded ;  and  if  motive  power  be  used at  all,  it  must  be  obtained  at  light  cost.
viii  PREFACE.
In  such  circumstances  are  some  of  the  colonies,  and  many parts  of  Ireland :  there  water-power  must  precede  the  steam- engine  and  be  the  pioneer  to  manufacturing  industry.
He  has  often  contemplated  writing  some  short  and popular  work  on  this  subject,  whenever  an  opportunity might  present  itself:  this  has  now  occurred  in  the  publi- cation of  a  series  of  rudimentary  books  by  Mr.  "Weale ; and  having  already  written  one  of  these,  a  "  Eudimentary Treatise  on  Cranes,"  which  has  circulated  very  extensively, and  been  translated  into  several  foreign  languages,  he  has been  induced  to  devotfe  such  intervals  of  leisure  as  he  could obtain  to  the  production  of  the  present  volume.
It  is  with  much  satisfaction  he  inscribes  this  Sudimentary Treatise  on  "Water  Power  to  the  Earl  of  Bosse ;  not  only  from his  lordship's  well-known  attachment  to  science,  but  from  his practical  knowledge  and  skill  in  the  mechanical  arts,  and his  zeal  for  the  benefit  and  improvement  of  his  country. It  will  be  most  gratifying  to  the  author  if  this  little  book contribute  in  any  way  to  extend  the  employment  of  a  power which  Ireland  so  largely  possesses,  or  to  aid  in  advancing the  progress  of  manufacturing  industry  in  the  sister  island.
J.  a.
Londmy  December ,  1862.
CONTENTS.
PREFACE   Vii
Chapter  I.
ON     THE    EARLY    USE    OP    MILL-STOKES   TO   GRIND   CORK,    AND    THE
EMPLOYMENT  OF  WATER  AS  A  MOVING  POWER  ...  1
Chapter  II. on  the  nature  and  properties  of  water,  as  they  relate  to
the  subject  of  this  book   .   10
Chapter  IIL on  the  measurement  of  effluent  water  .  .16
Chapter  IV.
THE  SOURCES  AND  SUPPLY  OF  WATER,   ITS  DISTRIBUTION    AND    USE
AS  A  MOTIVE  POWER   25
Chapter  V.
RAIN  GAUGES,  RESERVOIRS. — EMBANKMENTS  AND  THEIR  CONSTRUC- TION .   80
Chapter  VI.
HORIZONTAL  WATER-WHEELS  AND  SIMILAR  MACHINES       ...         37
Chapter  VII.
TURBINES  AND  THE  RE-ACTION  OF  WATER  PRESSURE  ON  WHEELS,  &C.        50
X  COKTENTS.
Chapter  VIII.
Fafpe UNDBRSHOT  WATER-WHEELS,  THEIR  USEFULNESS  IN  A  NEW  COUNTRY
TO  SAW  TIMBER,  &0   64
Chapter  IX.
OVERSHOT    WATER-WHEEI&      THE    GRAYITT    07    WATER    EMPLOYED
INSTEAD  OF  IMPUU3B   75
Chapter  X.
BREAST  WHEEUS  ;  M.  PONOELET's  WATER-WHEEL  FOR  LARGE  STREAMS
AND  LOW  FALLS   85
Chapter  XL
THE  water-pressure  ENGINE  AND  THE  WATER-RAM       ...        96
Chapter  XII. the  application  of  water-power  to  grind  corn  j  the  progress
of  corn  mills  and  development  of  their  machinery     .    117
Chapter  XUL the  conical  corn  mili&    mr.  schiele*s  conoidal  fivotb ;  mr.
westrup's  mill — ^and  conclusion   1s8
Appendix, on  centrifugal  and  rotary  pumps   146
LIST  OF  ILLUSTEATIONS.
Page
OBIGINAL  MILL    3
PBDanVB  WATEB-MILL    4
MILL  POUND  AT  POMFEH    5
CHINESE  WHEEL  FOB  IBBIGATION    9
WATEB  PABSINa  THBOUGH  NOTCH  AND  ORIFICE        .  .19
BAIN  GAUGE    34
EMBANKMENT  AND  DIAGRAM  OF  FBESSUBE                             .          .  35
BOUB  X  CUVEB.      ELEVATION  FLAN  AND  BUCKETS    ...  39
BOUET  VOLANT.  DO.  AND   VANES     .  .40
HOBIZONTAL  WHEEL.      (DBAWING  FBOM  GENOA)         ...  42
SECTION  OF  FIXED  AND  MOVING  PABTB    43
PLANS  OF           DO.                     DO.                          44
MM.   PBOMONT'S  wheel    46
DO.   QUARTER  PLAN  AND  SECTION    48
DR.  barker's  MILL  AND  PLAN    51
DIAGRAM  AND  SECTION    53
SECTION  OF  DOUBLE  MACHINE    54
WHITELAW'S  MILL  AND  PLAN    55
LOW  FBESSUBE  TUBBINE  AND   PLAN    59
HIGH  FBESSUBE  DO    61
QUABTEB  PLAN  OF  DO.    62
VOBTEX  WHEEL  AND  PLAN    63
UNDERSHOT  WHEEL  AND  AMEBICAN  SAW-MILL           ...  70
xii  LIST  OF   ILLUSTRATIONS.
PagtJ
JKT  OR  IMPULSE  WHEEL  .   74
OVERSHOT  WHEEL   79
BREAST  WHEEL   (MR.   RENNIE's)   86
BUCKETS — AND  VENTILATING  DO   88
DO.  AND  GOVERNOR,  WALTHAM  ABBEY     .  ...  .  .89
PONOELET*S  WATER-WHEEL    .94
PRESSURE  ENGINE,   ELEVATION,   AND  SECTION  .  .  .  .102
PLAN   OF  DO.   104
DO.      ARMSTRONG'S  ELEVATION    107
DO.  SECTION   AND  VALVES         .   110
WATER  RAM  MONTGOLFIER.     EASTON   AND  AMOS       .  .  .116
TWO  MODES  OP  DRIVING  MILL-STONES   119
NETHER  MILL-STONE   121
GTMBAL  RINGS        1^2
MILL-STONES  DRIVEN   BY  BEVILLED  WHEEIA     ....      126
MILL-STONES  DRIVEN  BY  SPUR  GEAR  .  .  .  .  127
MILL-STONES  DRIVEN  BY  BELTS   128
MR.   BOVILL'S  MODE   OP  VENTILATING   DO   137
MR.  SCHIELE's  conical  MILL  AND  MVOTS         ....      139
MR.  WESTRUP'S  MILL   142
bSjdimentaet  teeatise
ON
THE    POWER    OF    WATER
:      TO  TURN  MILLS  AND  GIVE  MOTION  TO  MACHINES.
CHAPTEE  I.
THE  EARLY  USE  OF  MILLSTONES  TO  GRIND  CORN,  AND  THE EMPLOYMENT  OF  WATER  AS  A  MOVING  POWER.
Although  labour  is  the  lot  of  man,  and  is  indeed  necessary to  his  existence,  yet  the  human  mind  naturally  revolts  from those  kinds  of  laoour  in  which  it  takes  no  part,  and  in  all ages  men  hate  endeavoured  to  shun  mere  ton  involving  only the  enfployment  of  animal  strength  without  the  exercise  of thought  or  dexterity.  Thus  it  has  ever  been  from  the earliest  ages  even  until  now,  that  occupations  requirmg nothing  beyond  the  exertion  of  muscular  force  have  been assigned  to  persons  taken  captive  in  war,  or  sold  into slavery,  or  reduced  by  other  n^sfortunes  to  perform  constant and  monotonous  labour.
Such  were  of  old  the  hewers  of  wood  and  the  drawers of  water,  and  when  com  was  first  ground  to  make  bread, the  task  of  turning  the  mill  was  peiformed  by  the  bondman or  the  captive,  or  else  among  rude  tribes  it  was  imposed  on the  women  of  the  family  while  the  men  were  engaged  in war  or  in  the  chase.
Thus  we  read  in  the  book  of  Judges,  when  the  Philistines heaped  injury  and  insult  on  their  mllen  foe,  "  they  put  out
2  EARLY  USE   OF   MILLSTONES  TO   GRIND   CORN.
his  eyes  and  bound  him  with  fetters  of  brass,  and  he  did grind  in  the  prison-house."
So  when  the  Prophet  foretells  the  utter  destruction  and desolation  of  a  great  and  mighty  empire  he  says,  "  Come down,  and  sit  in  the  dust,  O  virgin  daughter  of  Babylon, sit  on  the  ground :  there  is  no  throne,  O  daughter  of  the Chaldeans:  for  thou  shalt  no  more  be  called  tender  and delicate.    Take  the  millstones  and  grind  meal.'*
The  grinding  of  meal  appears  to  have  h&m  performed  in very  remote  ages  by  a  pair  of  millstones,  simuar  in  form  and in  principle  to  those  at  present  in  use,  the  difference  being chiefly  in  their  size  and  in  the  mode  of  driving  them.  The Mosaic  law  says,  "  No  man  shall  take  the  nether  or  the  upper millstone  to  pledge  :  for  he  taketh  a  man's  life  to  pledge." Such  millstones  were  used  by  the  Eoman  legions  in  Britain, and  are  often  found  about  their  ancient  camps  and  stations, but  nowhere  perhaps  in  such  number  and  Yonety  as  in  the county  of  Northumberland,  along  the  line  of  the  Eoman wall,  and  many  fine  examples  are  preserved  by  the  Anti- quarian Society  of  Newcastle-upon-Tyne,
These  are  generally  about  a  foot  in  diameter,  and  made  of the  hard  sandstone  K)\md  in  the  coal  districts,  hence  called millstone  grit.  The  lower  millstone  was  stationary ;  some- times it  was  made  larger  than  the  upper  stone,  and  had  a rim  or  border  to  confine  the  meal  and  cause  it  to  be  delivered by  a  spout  into  a  shallow  vessel  or  sieve,  but  generally  it was  a  round  stone  of  the  same  size  as  the  top  stone,  and must  have  been  set  on  a  cloth  spread  upon  the  ground  to receive  the  meal.
An  upright  pin  or  pivot  fixed  in  the  centre  of  the  nether millstone  formed  a  kind  of  axis,  and  passed  througlf  a  hole in  the  upper  stone,  which  like  the  nether  millstone  was  of  a flat  circular  form.  The  upper  stone  was  fitted  with  a  handle to  drive  it  round,  and  make  it  revolve  over  the  lower  stone ; sometimes  the  upper  surface  of  the  top  stone  was  hollowed into  a  shallow  dish  to  hold  a  portion  of  the  com  to  be ground,  which  was  gradually  shaken  down  the  hole  rouud the  fixed  axis  by  the  motion  of  the  mill.
It  is  curious  to  observe  that  the  principles  on  which  corn* mills  were  constructed  thousands  of  years  ago,  remain  the same  to  the  present  day,  and  '^  the  work  "  as  millwrights call  it,  that  is  the  system  of  grooves  cut  in  the  grinding faces  of  the  millstones  which  crossing  each  other  when  in motion  act  like  a  pair  of  shears  to  cut  the  grain  and  also  to throw  it  out  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference,  are  npw
ORIGINAL  MILL,  3
set  out  and  formed  in  the  same  way  as  thej  were  from  the beginning.  The  sketch  here  given  will  perhaps  afford  a better  explanation  than  many  words.
Although  the  mill  here  described  was  a  portable  domestic implement,  and  some  were  eren  small  enough  to  be  held in  the  lap,  yet  it  was  often  madcf  of  much  larger  dimensions, Mid  was  worked  by  many  persons  at  once  with  levers  or  bars like  a  capstan,  by  men  walking  in  a  circle  round  it,  and
Fig.  1.
r"—^
ORlOIKAIi  MILL.
pushing  the  bars  so  as  to  turn  the  upper  stone,  while  in some  cases  asses  and  other  cattle  were  employed,  and eventually  the  Eomans  used  the  power  of  water  to  drive their  miUs.  A  writer  of  the  time  thus  eloquently  alludes to  this  important  improvement :
"  Cease,  ye  maidens,  ye  who  laboured  in  the  mill ;  sleep now,  and  let  the  birds  sing  to  the  ruddy  morning ;  for  Ceres has  commanded  the  water  nymphs  to  perform  your  task. These,  obedient  to  her  call,  throw  themselves  upon  the wheel,  force  round  the  axletree,  and,  by  these  means,  the heavy  mill." — BechmamCs  History  of  Inventions,
The  water-wheels  first  used  to  drive  corn-mills  were horizontal;  they  were  of  small  size,  and  revolved  rapidly. The  axle  paased  through  the  centre  of  the  lower  millstone, as  the  spmdle  does  now.  It  turned  the  upper  millstone  by means  of  a  cross-bar  fixed  in  the  eye  or  centre  of  the  stone, whilst  a  current  of  water  directed  against  the  vanes  of  the wheel  on  one  side  of  the  axle,  urged  it  round.  Such  water- miUs  are  still  used  in  India  ;  and  a  curious  model  of  one,  in its  most  simple  and  primitive  form,  was  sent  to  the  Great
b2
4  PRIMITIVE  WATEE-MILL.
Exhibition  in  Hyde  Park.  A  modem  traveller  informs  us that  "  all  the  flour-mills  upon  the  Eiver  Meles  at  Smyrna are  constructed  in  this  way,  and  necessarily  answer  well  in counteies  where  water  power  is  abundant :  their  great simplicity  preventing  their  readily  getting  out  of  repair, while  costing  but  little  also!"  Some  of  these  simple  mills may  yet  be  found  in  remote  and  mountainous  parts  of  Italy and  France.
Fig.  2.
PRIMITIVE   WATEB-HILL.
The  horizontal  water-wheel  is  again  coming  into  notice with  many  refinements  and  improvements  of  modem  inven- tion ;  and  not  far  from  the  rude  Indian  model  before  men- tioned might  be  seen  the  elaborate  machine  of  Messrs. Fremont  &  Son,  French  engineers,  made  entirely  of  iron, capable  of  working  to  fifty  horses'  power,  with  a  fall  of  two metres,  or  six  feet  seven  mches,  and  susceptible  of  such  nice adjustment,  as  to  be  adapted  to  spin  cotton  and  silk  as  well as  to  grind  com ;  while  the  inventor  states,  from  his  expe- rience of  similar  wheels  already  in  action,  that  he  can  obtain more  than  70  per  cent,  of  the  power  expended,  and  that,  in one  instance,  the  effective  power  has  reached  79  per  cent.
The  Bomans  also  used  conical  mills  for  grinding  com.    A
MILL  FOUND  AT  POMPEII.  5
verf  complete  example  of  this  kind  was  found  in  the  exca- vations of  Pompeii,  where  it  had  been  buried  for  nearly seventeen  centuries.  The  localitv  appeared  to  have  been the  shop  of  a  wealthy  baker ;  ani  the  mill,  which  was  of considerable  size,  was  so  fitted  as  to  be  worked  by  men  or by  cattle.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  conical  flour-mill,  in  a modified  form,  should  be  again  brought  forward  and  exhi- bited as  a  modem  invention,  to  which  the  proprietors  attach the  highest  value.  Two  examples  of  conical  flour-mills,  both of  them  patented,  appeared  in  the  Great  Exhibition  of  1851, where,  at  the  same  time,  was  shown,  in  the  East  Indian section,  a  very  neatly  made  conical  null,  used  in  India  for husking  rice.
Fig.  3.
HILL    FOUND    AT    POMPEII.
The  vertical  water-wheel  appears  to  have  been  known  to the  ancients  at  a  very  early  period,  but  it  was  chiefly  used to  raise  water  for  the  purposes  of  irrigation.
Examples  of  such  wheels,  in  their  original  form  and  use, are  still  to  be  seen  on  the  Nile  and  the  Euphrates;  and wheels  are  also  employed  by  the  Chinese  to  raise  water  for
6  WATER  AS  A  MOVING  POWER.
their  rice  fields  and  cane  plantations ;  those  of  Egypt  and Syria  generally  resemble  each  other.  The  following  descrip* tion  of  them  was  given  by  Captain  (now  Colonel)  Chesney,  in his  survey  and  report  on  the  navigation  of  the  Euphrates  :—
"  The  scenery  above  the  town  of  Hit,  in  itself  very picturesque,  is  greatly  heightened,  as  we  are  carried  along the  current,  by  the  frequent  recurrence,  at  very  short intervals,  of  ancient  irrigating  aqueducts ;  which,  owing  to the  windings  of  the  river,  appear  in  every  variety  of  position, from  the  foreground  of  the  picture  to  the  distant  part  of ' the  landscape.  These  beautmil  specimens  of  art  and  -dura- bilily  literally  cover  both  banks,  and  prove  that  the  borders of  tne  Euphrates  were  once  thickly  mhabited  by  a  people far  advanced,  indeed,  in  the  apphcation  of  hydrauHcs  to domestic  purposes  of  the  first  and  greatest  utility,  the transport  of  water.
"  These  speaking  monuments  of  other  times  have,  as  may be  supposed,  suffered  in  various  degrees  during  the  lapse  of so  manjr  ages  of  partial  or  entire  neglect,  and  the  greater portion  is  now,  more  or  less,  in  ruins ;  but  some  have  been repaired  and  kept  up  for  use,  either  to  grmd  com  or  to irrigate,  having  a  modem  wheel  attached  to  the  ancient, simple,  and  most  ej£cient  model ;  the  whole  being,  in  some instances,  sufficiently  well  preserved  to  show  clearly  the origmal  application  of  the  machinery.
"  The  aqueducts  are  of  stone,  firmly  cemented,  narrowing  to about  two  feet  or  twenty  inches  at  top,  placed  at  right angles  to  the  current,  and  carried  various  distances  towards the  interior  from  200  to  1200  yards,  their  height  being regulated  by  the  level  of  the  ground  to  be  irrigated ;  the shorter  distances  have  one  height  of  arches,  and  the  larger ones  two,  one  above  the  other,  both  extremely  pointed :  in fact,  almost  forming  a  triangle  from  the  spring  of  the  arch to  its  point.  At  the  one  extremity  of  the  structure,  which is  some  little  distance  in  the  river,  the  building  makes  a turn  parallel  to  the  stream,  and  there  widens  sufficiently  to contain  one,  two,  or  three,  and,  occasionally,  four  wheels, parallel  to  each  other,  and  revolving  with  the  current,  each of  about  33  feet  diameter,  and  having  a  number  of  esorthen vessels  of  three  or  four  inches  diameter,  and  20  inches  long, placed  at  about  18  inches  apart,  rdund  the  exterior  rim  of the  wheel,  which  is  formed  of  light  small  scantling,  its greatest  width  being  rather  less  than  the  diameter  of  the vessels  attached  to  it ;  which,  dipping  a  few  inches  into  the
WATER  AS  A  MOVING  POWER.  7
water,  are  filled  and  forced  round  by  the  current  in  suc- cession, the  open  end  foremost,  until  each^  in  turn,  reaches the  top,  and  there  discharges  its  contents  into  a  trough, which  conveys  the  water  from  each  wheel  into  the  conduit of  the  aqueduct  (an  open  one),  with  a  gradual  fall,  as  far  as the  place  to  be  iirigated ;  and,  as  the  wheels  are  moveable, 80  as  to  elevate  the  axles,  by  means  of  stones  or  beams  of wood,  as  the  water  increases,  they  can  work  equally  weU  at any  height  of  the  river ;  the  earthen  vessels  giving  of  them- selves a  sufficient  impetus,  without  any  other  means,  except in  some  few  places  Tmere  the  current  happens  to  be  weak, in  which  case,  six  or  eight  fans  of  palm  branches,  each  about 18  inches  square,  are  added  to  the  sides  of  the  wheel's circumference,  to  give  the  water  more  power  upon  it.  Such additions  are,  however,  veiy  rare,  and  the  earthen  pots  alone are  almost  always  sufficient.
"  But  what  most  concerns  the  subject  of  this  survey  [the navigation  of  the  Euphrates],  is  the  existence  of  a  parapet wall  or  stone  rampart  in  the  river,  just  above  the  several aqueducts ;  in  general  there  is  one  of  the  former  to  each of  the  latter,  and  almost  invariably  between  two  mills  on opposite  banks,  a  wall  crosses  the  stream  from  side  to  side, with  the  exception  of  a  passage  left  on  the  centre  for  boats to  pass  up  and  down.  The  object  of  these  sub-aqueous  walls (mistaken  by  Alexander  the  Great  for  means  of  defence against  his  uresistible  legions)  would  appear  to  be  entirely with  a  view  to  raise  the  water  sufficiently  at  low  seasons,  to give  it  impetus,  as  well  as  a  more  abundant  supply  to  the wheels ;  and  their  effect  at  times  is  to  create  a  fill  in  every part  of  the  width,  save  the  opening  left  for  commerce, through  which  the  water  rushes  with  a  moderately  irregular surface :  these  dams  were  probably  from  four  to  eight  feet high  originalljr;  and  they  are  now  frequently  a  bank  of stones,  disturbing  the  evenness  of  the  current,  but  always affording  a  sufficient  passage  for  large  boats  at  low  seasons : and  ceasing  to  be  very  perceptible,  except  by  the  broken surface,  after  the  water  is  swollen.
"  Ten  miles  below  the  town  of  Hit,  the  last  of  these  irri- gating mills  and  artificial  barriers  is  passed,  and  a  few miles  lower  the  double  range  of  hills  is  nearly  lost,  and the  coimtry  becomes  comparatively  flat."
The  water-wheel  used  m  China  unites  with  the  simplicity of  all  Chinese  mechanism  great  ingenuity  of  construction and  adaptation.     The  change  of  position  of  the  buckets,  if
8  WATER  AS  A  MOVING  POWEE.
they  may  be  so  called,  produced  by  the  revolution  of  the wheel,  without  anjr  motion  of  the  buckets  themselves,  well deserves  to  be  noticed.
Two  hard  wood  posts  or  uprights  are  firmly  fixed  in  the bed  of  the  river,  in  a  line  perpendicular  to  its  banks ;  these posts  support  the  pivots  of  an  axis  of  about  ten  feet  long : this  is  the  axis  of  a  large  wheel,  consisting  of  two  rims  of unequal  diameter,  the  rim  which  is  nearest  to  the  river's bank  beiag  fifteen  inches  less  than  the  other ;  but  both  rims dip  into  the  stream,  and  both  rise  above  the  trough  or  spout which  receives  the  water  and  conveys  it  to  the  land  to  be irrigated.  '
The  only  materials  employed  in  the  construction  of  this water-wheel,  except  the  axle  and  the  two  posts  on  which  it rests,  are  afibrded  by  the  bamboo.  The  rims,  the  spokes, the  ladle-boards  or  floats,  the  tubes  or  buckets,  are  made  of entire  lengths,  or  large  pieces,  or  thin  slices,  or  single  joints, of  bamboo  ;  neither  nails,  pins,  nor  screws,  nor  any  lond  of metal,  are  used;  the  parts  are  firmly  bound  together  by cordage  of  split  bamboo  or  cane.
The  wheel  is  thus  framed, — sixteen  or  eighteen  spokes  are inserted  obliquely  into  the  axis  near  each  extremity,  and cross  each  other  at  about  two-thirds  of  their  length ;  the wheel  is  strengthened  where  the  arms  cross,  by  a  concentric circle,  and  the  ends  of  the  arms  or  spokes  are  secured  to  the two  rims.  The  spokes  proceeding  from  the  inner  end  of  the axis  next  to  the  river's  bank  support  the  larger  or  outer  rim, and  those  from  the  outer  or  inner  end  of  the  axis  support the  smaller  rim,  which  is  next  to  the  land.
Between  the  rims  and  the  crossing  of  the  spokes  is  a triangular  space,  which  is  woven  with  a  kind  of  close  basket- work  to  serve  as  ladle-boards  or  floats ;  these,  successively entering  the  stream,  are  impelled  by  the  current,  and  turn round  the  wheel.
The  buckets  are  tubes  of  bamboo,  closed  at  one  end  and attached  to  the  two  rims  of  the  wheel,  and  so  fixed  that  when they  are  on  a  level  with  the  axle,  they  have  an  inclination of  twenty-five  degrees  to  the  horizon  and  to  the  wheel's  axis.
The  closed  end  of  the  tube  is  of  course  the  lowest,  and  it is  fastened  to  the  outer  and  larger  rim ;  the  open  end  is attached  to  the  smaller  rim  nearest  the  land.  By  this position,  the  buckets  which  dip  into  the  stream  as  the  wheel revolves,  fill  with  water  and  rise  with  their  mouths  upper- most ;  their  inclination  gradually  alters  as  they  rise,  but  not
WATEE  AS  A  MOVING  POWER.  9
«
SO  much  as  to  let  their  contents  flow  out  until  they  reach the  toy,  when  they  pour  the  water  into  a  wide  trougli,  from which  it  is  distributed  to  the  plantations.
These  wheels  are  from  twenty  to  forty  feet  in  diameter, according  to  the  height  of  the  knd  on  the  river's  bank  and the  consequent  elevation  to  which  the  water  must  be  raised.
Pig.  4.
0HINB81E   WHEKL.
A  wheel  of  thirty  feet  carries  twenty  tubes  or  buckets, about  four  feet  long  and  two  inches  inside  diameter,  each  of them  holding  six-tenths  of  a  gallon,  or  twelve  gallons  in  the whole.     With  a  strewn  of  moderate  velocity,  the  wheel  will
b3
10  THE  NATUBE  AND  PUOPBETIBS  OF  WATBE,
make  foiir  revolutions  in  a  tninute  and  lift  forty-eight  gallons of  water,  ot  2,880  gallons  in  on  hour,  or  more  than  69,000 gallons  per  day.
The  position  of  the  bucket  as  it  rises  to  the  level  of  the axle  is  shown  at  A.    See  figure.
Thus,  at  a  very  trifling  expense,  a  machine  may  be  con- structed, which,  without  labour  or  attendance,  will  furnish  a large  and  constant  supply  of  water  for  agricultural  purposes at  a  considerable  elevation.  There  are  many  places  in England  where  such  means  of  irrigation  might  be  used  with advantage.
CHAPTEE  11.
THE  NATURE  AND  PBOPEBTIES  OF  WATER.
Having  thus  briefly  noticed  the  early  use  of  water  as  a motive  power,  it  may  perhaps  be  well,  before  proceeding farther,  to  consider  tne  nature  and  properties  of  water  itself, so  far  as  concerns  the  present  treatise.
It  was  long  held  to  be  one  of  the  four  elements,  and  a hundred  years  have  not  yet  passed  away  since  it  was  proved that  water  is  not  a  simple  substance,  but  that  it  is  composed of  oxygen  and  hydrogen.  The  honour  of  announcing  tins fact  appears  to  belong  to  James  Watt;  the  researches of  Dr.  Black,  and  the  experiments  of  Mr.  "Warltire, Mr.  Cavendish,  and  Dr.  Priestley,  led  him  to  this  con- clusion, which  is  stated  in  a  letter  dated  April  26th,  1783, addressed  hj  Mr.  "Watt  to  Dr.  Priestley,  through  whom  it was  communicated  to  the  Eoyal  Society,  who  printed  it  in their  Transactions.
The  idea  of  the  four  elements  must  now  be  treated  only as  a  beautiful  allegorv,  a  subject  on  which  sculptors  and artists  may  exercise  their  imagination  and  their  skill.
According  to  Dr.  Dalton,  water  consists  of  8  parts  by weight  of  oxygen  and  1  of  hydrogen  in  9  of  water.  It exists  in  four  states :  as  a  solid  in  the  form  of  ice,  liquid as  water,  in  the  state  of  vapour  as  steam,  and  it  exists  also in  combination  with  other  bodies.  Although  it  is,  strictly speaking,  in  the  liquid  form  alone  that  we  have  now  to consider  it,  yet  it  may  be  noticed,  as  important  to  the
THE  NATUAB  AND  PBOPE&TIES  OP  WATEB.  11
present  subject,  that  water  expands  in  bulk  and  decreases in  density  from  a  temperature  of  39  degrees  of  Fahrenheit's thermometer  up  to  212,  when  it  boils  and  evaporates  into steam;  that  below  89  degrees  it  again  expands  and decreases  in  density  down  to  32  degrees,  when  it  crystaUises into  ice.
It  is  seldom  that  this  difference  of  density  and  Tolume  is of  much  consequence  in  mechanical  practice,  jet  it  is  most important  as  it  respects  the  great  operations  of  nature ;  the expansion  of  water  in  assuming  the  form  of  ice  should never  be  forgotten  by  those  who  have  to  construct  hydraulic works;  its  bulk  is  then  increased  in  the  proportion  of 9  to  8,  and  the  force  with  which  it  expands  is  so  great that  scarcely  anything  will  resist  it.  The  strongest  pipes and  vessels  of  iron  are  split,  the  heaviest  weights  are  lifted, masonry  and  even  rocks  are  rent  asunder,  when  water having  found  its  way  through  some  small  chink  or  opening, has  frozen  within  the  mass ;  and  experiments  have  rendered it  probable  that  a  smgle  cubic  inch  of  water  confined  and frozen,  exerts  within  the  range  of  expansion  a  force  equal to  Idi  tons.  It  is  therefore  absolutely  necessary  that  care be  taken  either  to  prevent  water  from  lodging  or  to  provide means  for  allowing  it  to  expand  when  it  freezes.
By  thus  becoming  lighter  than  water,  ice  floats  upon the  sin&ce,  and  by  exposure  to  the  sun's  rays  is  quickly melted ;  besides  the  warmest  water  also  comes  to  the  top and  assists  in  melting  the  ice.
The  earth,  however,  is  a  good  non-conductor  of  heat,  and in  the  temperate  climate  of  England,  the  frost  seldom reaches  more  than  10  or  12  inches  below  the  surface  of  the ground  in  the  coldest  winter,  so  that  water-pipes  laid  at  the usual  depth  of  two  feet  underground  are  sufficientlv protected  from  freezing.  The  combination  of  water  with other  bodies,  although  a  chemical  operation,  is  most  valuable to  those  whose  business  it  is  to  build  dams  and  sluices.  If water  be  thrown  on  quick  lime,  nothing  but  a  red  heat  will again  separate  them ;  plaster  of  Paris  in  the  state  of  powder becomes  solid  when  mixed  with  water.  Barrow  Hme  and other  limes  of  similar  character  from  the  lias  beds,  and Eoman  cement,  become  solid  and  remain  hard  under  water.
A  cubic  foot  of  rain-water  at  a  mean  temperature,  when the  barometer  stands  at  29;5  inches,  weighs  1000  oimces avoirdupois,  or  62}  lb. ;  consequently  water  is  generally taken  as  the  standard  point  in  tables  of  specific  gravity,  in
12  THE  NATUEE  AND   PEOPERTIBS   OP  WATER.
which  the  weight  of  equal  bulks  of  other  substances  are compared  with  that  of  water  in  ounces  to  the  cubic  foot.
A  cubic  foot  contains  1728  cubic  inches,  and  the  imperial- standard  gallon  277*274  inches ;  a  pound  avoirdupois  weight of  water  contains  27*64  cubic  inches ;  so  that  an  imperial gallon  may  be  taken  to  weigh  10  lb.,  and  a  cubic  foot  to contain  6i  gallons.
A  pipe  of  one  inch  in  diameter,  and  one  yard  in  length, contains  28*26  cubic  inches,  or  a  pound  of  water  yery  nearly. Hence  the  following  practical  rule  is  generally  used  by millwrights  to  find  the  quantity  of  water  in  a  pipe  of  any given  diameter :
Square  the  diameter  of  the  pipe  in  inches,  and  you  have the  weight  of  water  in  pounds  per  yard  of  the  pipe's  length ; shift  the  decimal  point  one  place  to  the  left  and  you  have the  quantity  of  water  per. yard  in  gallons.
Thus  if  a  pipe  be  12  inches  in  diameter,  144  will  express the  weight  ol  water  it  contains  in  pounds  per  yard  long,,  and 14*4  the  quantity  in  gallons,  with  sufficient  exactness  for any  practical  purpose  in  mill-work.
The  force  required  to  compress  water,  even  to  render  the diminution  of  its  bulk  appreciable,  is  so  great,  that  practically it  may  be  regarded  as  incompressible,  and  consequently  non- elastic.  Hence  it  is  that  when  a  strong  iron  vessel,  as  the cylinder  of  a  hydraulic  press,  is  burst  by  overloading  it, no  explosion  takes  place ;  the  breaking  of  the  metal  at  once relieves  it  from  a  force  so  limited  in  its  range  of  expansion, that  the  fragments  do  not  fly  asunder,  but  fall  as  ii  broken by  mere  weight.
GPhe  author  witnessed  the  compressure  of  water  by  the apparatus  of  Mr.  Perkins ;  and  Professors  CoUadon  and  Sturm, in  a  series  of  experiments  carefully  made  on  water  com- pletely deprived  of  air,  reduced  its  bulk  -^^  with  a  pressure of  24  atmospheres.
This  resistance  to  compression  renders  water  so  useful  a medium  for  transmitting  and  multiplying  power  by  means  of Bramah's  press,  and  thus  by  the  hydraiSic  ram,  the  impulse of  a  fall  of  water  a  few  feet  in  height  through  an  enclosed pipe,  when  suddenly  checked,  strikes  as  it  were  a  blow  which will  force  a  portion  of  the  stream  much  higher  than  the level  of  the  dam  from  which  it  flows.
Water  in  falling  is  subject  to  the  same  laws  of  gravitation as  other  heavy  bodies,  but  in  the  operation  of  those  laws there  is  this  difference ;  namely,  that  a  detached  body,  as  a
THE  NATUEE   AND  PROPERTIES   OP  WATER.  13
stone,  a  mass  of  metal,  a  cannon-ball  for  instance,  falls  freely and  without  other  retardation  or  resistance  than  that  of  the air,  or  without  any  retardation,  if  it  fall  in  tjocuo  ;  but  wat-er to  fall  must  flow  also,  consequently  in  speaking  of  the  fall  of water  we  mean  a  continuous  stream,  or  jet  or  sheet  of  water descending  from  a  higher  to  a  lower  level,  all  parts  of  which are  in  motion  at  the  same  time,  and  in  constant  connection with  the  succeeding  column  and  adjacant  body  of  water,  to which  also  motion  is  communicated,  and  consequently  force is  lost.
If  a  ball  of  lead  be  dropped  from  a  high  tower,  it  falls  (as nearly  as  may  be)  16  feet  1  inch  in  one  second  of  time ;  at the  end  of  that  time  it  has  acquired  a  velocity  of  32  feet 2  inches  ;  it  falls  in  the  next  second,  48  feet  3  inches,  and in  two  seconds  of  time  it  has  fallen  64  feet  4  inches.  So that  if  the  time  or  seconds  be  represented  thus,  the  time 1"  2"  S"  4i"  5^* ;  the  spaces  fallen  in  each  second  wiU  be  as 1,  3,  5,  7,  9 ;  the  spaces  fSallen  through  in  the  whole  time  as 1,  4,  9, 16,  25.  This  proportion  holds  good  for  any  time  or space  through  which  a  bodyMU  m  vacuo;  but  the  air's resistance  in  the  present  case  does  not  materially  interfere, and  may  be  disregarded  within  the  limits  of  a  fall  of  water applied  to  mechanical  purposes.
Thus  the  velocities  are  as  the  times  of  descent,  and  the spaces  fallen  through  are  as  the  squares  of  the  times ;  con* sequently,  the  velocities  are  as  the  square  roots  of  the  heights or  spaces  through  which  a  heavy  body  falls ;  therefore,  as gravitation  produces  the  velocity  of  2  in  descending  through the  space  1,  the  height  in  feet  through  which  the  body  &Us, being  multiplied  by  64*3,  will  give  the  square  of  its  velocity, in  feet,  per  second.  So  if  the  height  fallen  be  1  foot,  the square  root  of  64'3,  or  8*02  (very  nearly),  is  the  velocity with  which  a  heavy  body  falls  through  that  space.
The  difference  between  a  flowing  and  a  falling  body  is evident,  although  both  are  governed  by  the  laws  of  gravita- tion, and  accordingly  we  find  that  the  motion  of  fluids  has attracted  the  attention  of  mathematicians  and  philosophers, from  a  very  early  period,  in  Italy,  France,  Q-ermany,  and England,  up  to  the  present  day;  and  many  expenments have  been  made  from  time  to  time,  to  ascertain  exactly  the value  of  this  difference.  The  late  Mr.  Eennie,  being  much engaged  in  the  improvement  of  rivers,  the  drainage  of  large tracts  of  land,  and  the  application  of  water  to  turn  mills, made  many  elaborate  experiments  for  this  purpose;  his
14  THE  NATURE  AND  PBOMRTIES  OP  WATER,
researclies  have  been  ably  continued  by  his  sons,  and Mr.  G-eorge  Eennie  has  contributed  to  the  Transactions  of the  Eoyal  Society  some  valuable  papers  on  the  subject : subsequently,  an  extensive  series  of  experiments  was  made by  MM.  Poncelet  and  Lesbros,  by  order  of  the  French government.
The  value  and  importance  of  such  investigations  will  be appar^Qit,  when  it  is*  considered  that  the  first  points  to  be determined,  in  all  great  hydraulic  works,  are  the  quantity  of water  available  for  the  object  in  view,  and  the  height  from which  it  falls.
s  These  constitute  the  power  to  be  employed;  and  when these  are  known,  the  application  of  the  disposable  force  to produce  the  greatest  effect  is  next  to  be  considered.
The  quantity  which  a  stream  will  yield  in  a  given  time, is  generally  ascertained  by  placing  a  din  or  barrier  across  it, commonly  of  timber.  Inthis  there  is  either  a  sliding  sluice, through  which  the  water  is  discharged,  so  that  the  size  of the  rectangular  oriiSice  can  be  regulated  at  pleasure ;  or  else a  rectangidar  notch  is  cut  in  the  edge  of  the  dam,  at  the surface  of  the  water,  so  that  the  section  of  the  passing stream  may  be  measured  as  it  flows  through  the  notch.
If  the  water  flow  through  an  opening  in  the  dam,  so adjusted  by  a  sluice  that  the  discnarge  runs  constantly through  it,  while  the  dam  is  maintained  either  frill  or  at  an uniform  level  above  the  opening ;  and  if  the  laws  of  gravita- tion, without  allowance  or  correction,  governed  the  flow,  it would  only  be  requisite  to  measure  the  area  of  the  opening, and  to  calculate  the  velocity  of  the  water  as  that  of  a  hea^ body  falling  from  the  surface  of  the  dam  or  reservoir through  the  centre  of  the  oriflce,  and  the  area  multiplied by  the  velocity  would  give  the  quantity  of  water  passing through  it.
In  like  manner,  if  no  correction  were  required,  to  find  the quantity  of  water  flowing  through  a  rectangular  notch,  cut in  the  upper  plank  of  the  barrier,  it  would  only  be  requisite to  measure  the  height  frt)m  the  sur&ce  of  the  reservoir  to the  bottom  of  the  notch,  in  order  to  find  the  velocity  as before ;  and  then  to  take  two-thirds  of  the  quantity  which would  flow  at  that  velocity  through  the  whole  area  of  the notch,  the  proportion  of  two  to  three,  that  is  the  area  of the  parabola  described  by  the  water,  being  two-thirds  of  its circumscribing  rectangle.
Such,  indeed,  were  the  rules  given  by  some  of  the  best
THB  NATUEE  AKD  PEOPEETIBS  0?  WATER.  15
authorities ;  but  the  eyidence  of  the  senses  cast  a  doubt  on their  truth,  and  experiments  showed  that  the  actual  quantity of  effluent  water  was  less  than  the  theoretic  quantity.
Sir  Isaac  Newton  found  that  the  velocity  of  water  issuing from  a  round  hole  in  the  bottom  of  a  vessel  four  feet  high, the  hole  being  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  made  through  a  thin plate  of  metfij,  was  less,  than  it  ought  to  be  in  the  propor- tion of  1  to  the  square  root  of  2 ;  for  he  observed  the vein  of  the  effluent  water,  and  found  it  to  contract,  and grow  narrower,  to  the  distance  of  about  a  diameter  of  the hole  below  the  bottom  of  the  vessel,  so  that  the  diameter  of the  vein  at  this  place  was  less  than  the  diameter  of  the  hole, in  the  proportion  of  21  to  25,  and  consequently,  the  area of  the  section  of  the  vein  thus  contracted,  to  be  less  than the  area  of  the  hole,  in  the  proportion  of  Ml  to  625 ;  that is,  as  1  to  the  square  root  of  2,  or  as  *7056  to  1.
But  as  all  experiments  of  this  kind,  made  by  mathe- maticians, were  of  necessity  conducted  on  a  small  scale,  the results  deduced  from  them  were  by  no  means  satisfactory  to m^i  who  had  to  deal  with  water  in  the  execution  of  large works,  as  it  was  not  probable  that  the  causes  of  contraction in  a  vein  of  water  an  inch  in  diameter,  would  bear  the  sa,me proportion  to  the  waters  of  a  river  discharged  through  a sluice.
Hence  it  was,  that  persons  in  extensive  practice  endea- voured to  form  rules  for  themselves,  based  on  their  own experience ;  and  as  the  circumstances  in  which  such  observa- tions were  made  varied,  so  did  the  rules  deduced  from tiiem  vary  also.  Mr.  Hennie  made  many  experiments  and observations  to  determine  the  difference  between  the theoretic  discharge  (computed  by  the  laws  of  gravitation) and  the  actual  discharge  diminished  by  friction,  later^ retardation,  reaction  of  the  adjacent  fluid,  and  other  causes of  diminished  velocity  or  volume  and  consequent  quantity. Other  engineers  did  the  same.  The  French  government, considering  the  question  as  one  of  public  interest,  appointed a  commission  to  determine  it :  the  elaborate  experiments on  the  great  scale,  made  by  their  engineers,  under  the direction  of  MM.  Poncelet  and  Lesbros,  brought  it  within narrow  limits ;  and,  in  December,  1851,  the  Institution  of Civil  Engineers,  in  London,  awarded  an  honorary  premium to  Mr.  Bkckwell,  one  of  their  members,  for  his  paper,  entitled "  Eesults  of  a  series  of  practical  experiments  on  the  dis- charge of  water  by  over-faUs."
16  MEASUEBMENT  OP   EFFLUENT  WATER.
CHAPTER  III.
ON  THE  MEASUREMENT  OP  EPPLUENT  WATER.
There  is  perhaps  no  'point  which  has  occasioned  more dispute  and  litigation,  than  the  conflicting  rights  of  persons entitled  to  take  water  power,  in  certain  proportions,  from  a common  source^^  where  the  demand  exceeds  the  supply ;  and there  are  perhaps  few  of  greater  interest  at  the  present time,  when  the  increased  size  and  population  of  our  towns and  cities  render  their  call  for  water  imperative.
The  conclusions  arrived  at  by  Mr.  Q-eorge  Eennie,  as reported  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  of  the  Eoyal Society,  are, —
1.  That  the  quantities  discharged  in  equal  times  are  as the  areas  of  the  orifices.
2.  That  the  quantities  discharged  in  equal  times,  under different  heights,  are  nearly  as  the  square  roots  of  the corresponding  heights.
3.  That  the  quantities  discharged  in  equal  times,  under different  heights,  are  to  each  other  in  the  compound  ratio  of the  areas  of  the  apertures,  and  of  the  square  roots  of  the heights,  nearly.  The  heights  were  measured  from  the  centre of  the  apertures;  and  the  mean  of  several  experiments showed,  that  the  co-efficients  or  numbers  expressing  the proportion  between  the  theoretic  discharge  of  the  water, calculated  as  a  falling  body,  and  the  actual  discharge,  as measured,  are  as  under;  all  the  openings  being  formed in  brass  plates  ^^  of  an  inch  thick.
Bound  hole,  1  inch  diameter,  with  4  ft.  head.    0*621
Do.  do.  1  ft.
Triangular  hole  (equilateral)  1  in.  area  4  ft.
Do.      do.  do.  1ft.
Eectangular  holes  1  in.  sq.  and  2  x  i  4  ft.
Do.      do.         do.  do.     1ft.
0-645 0-593 0-596 0-593 0-616
The  mean  of  all  these  numbers  is  '610,  and  for  the  rectan- gular holes,  it  is  *600.  Hence  Mr.  Bennie  deduces  the following  formula : —
MEASUREMENT  OF   EFFLUENT  WATEB*  17
Let  A=tlie  area  of  the  orifice  in  square  feet. H=tbe  altitude  or  head  of  water  in  feet. T= the  time  in  seconds. g  =:the  action  of  gravity  in  one  second. Q = the  quantity  of  water  discharged  in  cubic  feet.
Suppose  the  hole  to  be  2  feet  long  and  6  inches  wide,  the area  1  square  foot,  having  the  long  side  parallel  with  the water's  surface,  and  a  head  of  4  feet  above  the  centre  of  the hole.    Then  wHl  Q  =  6  A  T  Vy  H.
Thus — multiply  643,  the  effect  of  gravity,  by  4  feet,  the head  of  water,  for  the  theoretic  velocity  in  feet  per  second ; and  as  the  area  is  1  square  foot,  the  velocity  will  also  be the  quantity  discharged  per  second  in  cubic  feet.
64-3
  4  -
1
257-2(ie'037 1
26 6
157 156
3203 3
12000 9609
320671  239300 I  224469
16037 •6
Actual  discharge  9*6222  cubic  feet  per  second, or,  577*332  cubic  feet  per  minute.
The  results  of  the  experiments  made  by  MM.  Poncelet and  Lesbros  by  order  of  the  French  government,  in  which neither  labour  nor  expense  was  spared,  show  that  with  an opening  of  20  centimetres  or  7*87  inches  square,  and with  a  head  of  1  metre  68  centimetres  or  6  feet  6  inches from  the  upper  side  of  the  opening  to  the  surface  of  still water,  the  co-efficient  is  0*600.  When  the  head  or  altitude was  diminished  to  four  or  five  times  the  height  of  the  opening it  increased  to  0*605,  but  it  again  diminished  rapidly,  as the  altitude  diminished  to  0*593.
With  orifices  of  smaller  dimensions ;  namely,  from  10  to  5 centimetres  (3*9371  to  1*9685  inches)  the  same  law  was
18  MEASUREMENT  OF  EFFLUENT  WATER.
observed,  the  co-efficients  being  for  an  opening  of  10 centimetres  0-611,  0'618  and  0*611;  for  an  opening  of  5 centimetres  0618,  0-631  and 0*628.
It  is  evident  that  with  small  orifices  the  effect  of  high heads  would  be  to  contract  the  vein  and  diminish  the discharge,  and  the  nearer  the  orifice  could  be  brought  to the  surrace,  so  that  it  might  still  be  kept  running  with  a  full stream  and  without  causing  any  depression  of  surface  or eddy,  the  greater  would  be  the  discharge.  But  with  larger apertures,  of  a  m^tre  in  length,  by  60  centimetres  in  depth, or  39-371  x  19685  inches,  equal  to  6-38  square  feet  in  area, the  co-efficients  gradually  increased  with  an  increased  head or  altitude,  thus : —
A  head  of  0*10  metres  =     8*937  inches,  gave  a  co-effident  of  0*552
„         1*00        „  39*871        „  „  0*691
4-00        „         157-484,  or  18  ft.  li  in.       „  0-604
All  these  observations  and  experiments  differ  so  little,  that *6  of  the  theoretic  quantity  may  be  taken  for  general  practice. The  proportion  between  the  theoretic  and  the  actual discharge  from  open  notches  in  dams,  was  found  to  be  '677 when  the  notch  was  9  inches  deep,  and  *727  when  it  was 1  inch  deep ;  and,  as  the  discharge  from  an  open  notch  is equal  to  i  of  that  from  an  orifice  of  the  same  size  discharging a  fiill  stream  under  the  same  head,  these  numbers  being multiplied  by  -666,  give  '450,  and  -484  as  the  factors  for finding  the  quantities  of  water  issuing  from  notches  of  those depths  in  a  second  of  time — for  greater  depths,  and  as  a general  rule,  '400  may  be  used.  Mr.  N.  Beardmore,  in  hia useful  handbook  of  tables,  showing  the  discharge  through sluices,  pipes,  &c.,  founds  his  calculations  of  the  flow  of water  through  open  notches  on  the  following  formula —
d  =  2144/h»"
taking  d  to  be  the  quantity  discharged  in  cubic  feet  per minute  over  1  foot  in  width  of  the  waste  board  or  sill  of the  noteh,  and  h  te  be  the  true  height  from  the  siU  of  the noteh  to  the  surface  of  the  water  where  it  is  at  rest.  The principle  of  this  formula,  as  in  those  abready  noticed,  is,  that the  curve  of  the  water  falling  over  being  a  parabola,  there can  be  discharged  only  two-thirds  of  the  water  that  would pass  the  full  section  due  to  h  ;  the  constant  number  214  is two-thirds  of  321,  which  he  states  has  been  found  by  frequent trials  te  represent  the  factor  te  be  multiplied  by  the  square
MBASimBMBNT  OP  EFJ-LTJENT  WATElt.
19
jpoot  of  H,  the  height  in  feet  for  giving  the  mean  velocity  in feet  per  minute  of  water  passing  over  a  waste  board.
Assuming  this  to  be  correct,  the  velocity,  and  consequently the  quantity  of  water  which  would  run  over  every  foot  in width  of  a  rectangular  notch,  1  foot  in  depth  from  the water's  surface,  would  be  214  cubic  feet  per  mmute.
The  square  root  of  64*3,  or  802,  which  is  the  theoretic velocity  for  1  foot  faU,  multiplied  by  0*45,  gives  for  the actual  velocity,  3*601  in  feet  per  second,  and  this  by  60 gives  216  cubic  feet  per  minute.
Fig.  6.
This  difference  is  very  small  compared  to  what  may  arise from  the  form  of  the  notch  or  aperture ;  for  a  plain  rectan- gular notch  with  square  edges  cut  in  a  3-inch  plank,  will discharge  very  much  less  than  one  having  its  mner  edges next  the  reservoir,  or  dam  whence  the  stream  issues,  beveUed off  in  the  parabolic  form  of  the  contracted  vein.  If  the notch  or  aperture  be  of  small  dimensions,  a  difference  of  one fourth  of  the  whole  quantity  may  be  made,  as  was  proved by  Venturi,  and  in  works  on  a  larger  scale ;  care  should  be taken  to  form  the  wing  walls  to  sluices,  and  bridges,  with parabolic  or  "trumpet-shaped"  approaches,  so  that  the water  may  enter  and  pass  without  other  obstruction  than the  contraction  of  the  overflow,  or  sluice-way  itself  may present  to  it;  and  when  water  passes  through  a  parallel channel,  canal,  or  trunk,  the  sectional  area,  multiplied  by the  mean  velocity,  will  show  the  quantity  passing  in  a  given time.
The  mean  velocity  is  that  of  the  water's  surfece  added  to that  at  the  bottom  of  the  current,  and  their  sum  divided  by two,  or  it  may  be  determined  sufficiently  near  for  any  useful purpose,  by  ascertaining  the  surface  velocity  in  inches  per second  in  the  middle  of  the  stream ;  call  this  velocity  s,  and
20  MEASUREMENT  OF   EFFLUENT  WATBE.
the  mean  velocity  will  be  equal  to  s — \^^ — 5.  Suppose  the stream  flows  at  the  rate  of  36  inches  per  second,  or  180 feet  per  minute  upon  the  surface,  then
B  being  equal  to  36  inches  36
deduct     _5  5*5
extract  the     *)  6|31'(5'5  30*5  in.  per  second,
square  root  )  5125  60
105|600  12|  18300
525  152'5  ft.  per  minute.
If  30*5  the  mean  velocity  in  inches  per  second  be multiplied  by  5,  the  product  is  152*5,  the  mean  velocity in  feet  per  minute.  The  bottom  velocity  will  be  equal  to 8 — v's  -f  5  or  36 — 11  =  25  inches  per  second,  or  125  feet per  minute,  very  nearly ;  the  sum  of  the  top  and  bottom velocities  so  calculated  is  305,  and  half  that  sum  is  152*5. If,  therefore,  the  water-course  be  4  feet  wide  and  2  feet deep,  having  a  sectional  area  of  8  feet,  152*5  X  8  or  1220 cubic  feet  will  pass  through  it  in  one  minute.
While  writing  these  pages  the  author  received  a  copy  of Mr.  Blackwell's  paper  containing  the  details  and  results  of his  numerous  and  varied  experiments.
Mr.  Mylne,  of  the  New  Biver,  kindly  sent  a  series  of e:g)eriment8,  in  making  which  he  was  assisted  by  Mr. M!urray,  then  his  pupil;  and  other  engineers,  engaged  in water-works  on  a  large  scale,  contributed  their  observations, and  the  practical  rules  they  had  founded  upon  them.
In  pnnciple  all  these  rules  agree ;  their  corrections  vary less  than  might  be  expected ;  and  their  expression  is generally  sim3ar  to  the  formula  given  by  Mr.  George Eennie,  in  his  paper,  read  to  the  Boyal  Society,  which Mr.  Blackwell  has  called  No.  1,  and  writes  thus : —
Q=s/27lIxZHxw. in  which
Q  is  the  discharge  in  cubic  feet  per  second.
2  ^  =  64*3  the  effect  of  gravity  (Mr.  Eennie's  g).
H  the  head  in  feet  {I  H  the  section  of  the  stream).
I  width  of  the  overfall  in  feet.
m  the  co-efficient  of  correction.
Or  they  resemble  the  following  formula,  which  he  calls No.  2,  and  writes  thus : —
Q=H|xZxA;.
MEASUREMENT  OF  EFFLUENT  WATER.  21
in  which
Q  is  the  discharge  in  cubic  feet  per  second.
I  the  width  of  overfall  in  feet.
H  the  head  in  inches.
k  the  co-efElcient  of  correction.
The  head  is  the  height  of  still  water  above  the  sill  of  the overfall.
Mr.  Mylne's  rule  runs  thus : — ^Extract  the  square  root  of two-thirds  of  the  head  or  depth,  measured  in  inches,  from the  sill  of  the  overfall  to  the  sur&ce  of  the  still  water,  and multiply  it  by  sixteen  for  the  velocity  in  inches  per  second ; multiply  this  velocity  by  the  section  of  the  stream,  also  in inches,  and  divide  the  product  by  1728,  the  number  of inches  in  a  cubic  foot,  for  the  quantity  in  cubic  feet  dis- charged per  second.  A  practical  allowance  for  retardation is  here  made,  by  taking  two-thirds  of  the  head  instead  of  the whole.
"With  respect  to  the  formulsB,  No.  1  and  No.  2,  which  are in  general  use,  the  only  difference  among  engineers  is  in  the numbers  they  take  as  co-efficients  of  correction.  The number  commonly  taken  by  English  engineers  is  51  or  6*15 per  foot  per  minute.
Thus,  if  the  depth  of  overfall  be  12  inches,  the  cube  is 1728,  and  the  square  root  of  this,  41*58  x  5*15,  gives  the discharge  through  an  open  notch  a  foot  square,  as  214*1876 cubic  feet  per  minute,  the  same  as  shown  in  Mr.  Beardmore's tables.
Mr.  Myhie's  rule  gives  226*2  cubic  feet.  Some  engineers use  5*35  and  6'4,  which  last  number  gives  224*532  cubic feet  per  minute.  Mr.  Blackwell's  experiment,  like  those  of the  French  engineers,  MM.  Poncelet  and  Lesbros,  show that  the  co-efficients,  vary  with  the  depth,  the  width,  and the  form  of  the  notch  or  overfall,  and  that  all  the  numbers used  are,  strictly  speaking,  applicable  only  to  the  peculiar circumstances  of  each  particular  case,  although,  within certain  limits,  they  may  approximate  sufficiently  near  to  the truth  for  practical  purposes.
These  experiments,  243  in  number,  were  made  by  Mr, Blackwell  on  the  Kennet  and  Avon  Canal,  through  over- alls varying  in  width  and  form.
1.  "With  the  water  falling  over  the  edge  of  a  thin  iron
Slate,  through  notches  3  feet  and  10  feet  long,  of  varying epths.
2i
MEASUREMENT  OP  EPFLUENT  WATER*
2.  Over  a  plank,  2  inches  thick,  through  notches,  3  feet, 6  feet,  and  10  feet  long.
3.  Over  the  same  plank,  2  inches  thick,  with  wings converging  towards  the  notch  at  an  angle  of  64  degrees.
4.  The  notch,  3  feet  wide,  with  the  sill  or  crest,  3  feet broad,  sloping  1  in  12,  fixed  on  to  the  outer  edge  of the  plank,  so  as  to  form  an  uninterrupted  continuation  of  it, like  the  crest  of  a  weir.
5.  The  same,  with  the  crest  or  siU  sloping  1  in  18.
6.  The  overfall,  with  notch  10  feet  long,  the  crest  or  sill 3  feet  broad,  laid  level.
Similar  experiments  (about  twenty  in  number)  were  made at  Chew  Magna,  under  the  direction  of  Mr.  James  Simpson, which  are  tabulated  in  Mr.  Blackwell's  paper  with  his  own ; and  this  table  gives  perhaps  the  best  arranged  view  of  the subject  which  has  yet  appeared.  The  reader  who  desires  to know  the  details  of  these  experiments  is  referred  to  Mr. Blackwell's  communication  of  May  6,  1851,  in  the  Pro- ceedings of  the  Institution  of  CivU  Engineers — a  paper which  well  deserves  perusal  mi  study.
Table  tkomng  the  Variation  of  the  Co-bfficjibntb  for  the  different OvBBFALi£.     {m  and  k  mean  Co-efficients.)
OverfaUs.
m
k
Thin  plate,                                 3  feet  long
10         „        .        .    .
Plank,  2  inches  wide,                   8        „    .        .        .
MM                                  6          „         .         .     ,
10       „   .      .      .
„    (with  wings)                 10        „        .        .    . Bar,  2  inches  wide.  Chew  Magna,  10        „    . Crest,  8  feet  wide,  sloped  1  in  12   8         „        .        .    . ,f           „                1  „  18   8        „    .
10        „        .        .    . level      8        „    .        .        .
>t                    tf                                 M               O               „              .              .       . ft                    ft                                 tf            i"               »»       •              •              •
•421 •446 •380 •877 •871 •459 •480 •888 •839 •337 •311 •322 •314
•080 •086 •078 •072 •072 •090
•066 •066 •066 •060 •061 •061
It  will  be  observed  that  the  means  of  these  numbers  for simple  overfalls  or  notches,  excluding  those  given  by  the broad  crests,  made  to  resemble  the  top  of  a  stone  weir  or dam,  are  for  m  419,  and  for  k  '079 ;  which  last  number being  multiplied  by  60,  to  make  it  the  factor  for  feet  per
^IQASUBEMENT  07  EFFLUENT  WAT££«
28
minute,  gives  474.  So  that  the  first  is  slightly  over  Mr. George  Eennie's  "400,  and  the  second  somewhat  under  the number  5*1  or  5*15  generally  used.  This  is  accounted  for by  so  many  experiments  with  low  heads,  as  will  be  seen  on referring  to  the  next  table,  arranged  by  Mr.  Blackwell.
Table  shomng  the  Vabutioit  of  the  Cq-eppicdbnts /or  the  different  Heads OF  Water,   .{m,  and  h  mean  Co-efi^cents.)
No.  of trUOs.
Description  of  Qyerfalls.
Head  in inches.
m
k
6
Thin  plate  3  feet  long   .   '     .
n                »                M             •           »      •
lto8 3  to  6
•440 •402
•085 •078
11
Thin  plate  10  feet  long
»           »            *>         •        •    •
yf               if               tt       •          *          •
lto3 3to6 6to9
•501 •435 •370
•096 •086 •072
28
Flank  2  inches  thick,  with  notch 3  feet  long        .... »            ft            >»         •        «    •
lto3 3  to  6 6  to  10
•342 •384 •406
•066 •074 •077
56
Plank  2  inches  thick,  with  notch 6  feet  long        ....
M                     19                    >»                •              •        • >»                     »                    »          •              •              •
lto3 3  to  6 6to9 9  to  14
•359 •396 •392 •358
*069 •077 •074 •069
40
Plank  2  inches  thick,  with  notch 10  feet  long      .... »            »            »         •        •     •
»                      »                      M          •               •               •
lto3 3  to  6 6  to  7 9t«12
•346 •397 •374 •836
•068 •076 •072 •062
4
Plank  2  inches  thick,  notch  10  feet, with  wings        .....
lto2 4  to  5
•476
•442
•092
•087
7
Overfall  with  crest    .        .        .    .
3  feet  wide,  sloping  1  in  12    .
3  feet  long,  like  a  weir      .        .    .
lto3 3  to  6 6  to  9
•342 •328 •311
•066 •063 •060
9
Overfall  with  crest
3  feet  wide,  sloping  1  in  18
3  feet  long,  like  a  weir  ,
lto3 3  to  6 6  to  9
•362 •345 •332
•070 •066 •064
6
Ditto.    Sloping  1  in  18  .
8  feet  wide  x  10  feet  long .        .     .
lto4 4  to  8
•328 •850
•063 •068
14
Overfall,  with  level  crest 3  feet  wide  X  6  feet  long    .        .    . tf           »»           »     •        •        •
lto3 3to6 6  to  9
•305 •811 •318
•059 •060 •061
u
UEASUfiEUENT  OF  EFFLUENT  WATER.
No.  of trials.
Head  in inches.
m
h
15
Over&ll  6  feet  long,  with   leyel crest  3  feet  broad.
3  to  7 7  to  12
•330 •310
•062 •060
12
Overfall  with  level  crest,  10  feet long,  3  feet  broad     .
}t                      if                      19                  •               •        •
lto5 5to8 8  to  10
•306 •327 •313
•059 •063 •061
61
At  Chew  Magna,  overfall  bar,  10 feet  long,  2  inches  thick  . »>            »            »>         •        •    •
lto3 3  to  6 6  to  9
•437 •499 •505
It  appears  from  the  detailed  experiments,  that  when  the OYerfaU  is  a  thin  plate  it  discharges  a  greater  proportionate quantity  when  the  stream  is  only  1  inch  deep  than  with greater  depths,  the  vein  contracting  with  the  increased  head, and  consequent  force  of  the  stream.  When  planks  2 inches  thick  form  the  overfall,  the  flow  of  water  bemg  more retarded,  a  greater  head  is  requisite  to  overcome  the  resist- ,ance;  and  the  maximum  discharge  is  given  by  a  head  of 7'  inches ;  and  it  does  not  afterwards  increase  in  pro- portion to  the  depth,  but  the  co-efficient  lessens  as  the depth  becomes  greater.  When  the  length  of  the  overflow plank  is  10  feet,  the  co-efficient  is  greatest  with  a  depth  of  6 inches,  namely  '406;  and  when  wing-boards  are  added, causing  the  stream  to  converge  towards  the  overfall,  at  an angle  of  64^,  tha  co-efficient  is  greater  even  when  the  head is  less,  and  shows  the  great  utiSty  of  proper  wing-walls  on bridges  and  sluices.  When  the  overfall  has  a  broad  crest like  a  weir,  the  co-efficient,  as  might  be  expected,  decreases, and  is  least  when  the  crest  is  level.
The  author  has  been  anxious  to  avail  himself  of  the  many observations  and  experiments  with  which  he  has  been favoured  on  this  part  of  his  subject,  respecting  which  so much  difference  of  opinion  has  existed,  and  to  bring  the whole,  which  were  scattered  in  different  places,  and  in severad  hands,  into  oiie  general  view,  even  at  the  risk  of being  somewhat  tedious  to  his  readers.  The  public  is  much indebted  to  Mr.  Blackwell  for  haviM  laid  these  numerous trials  before  the  Institution  of  Civil  !&igineers,  to  be  printed in  their  Proceedings ;  and  it  ought  to  be  more  generally known  that  such  valuable  papers  are  not  merely  given  to
SOURCES  AND   SUPPLY  OP  WATEE.  25
members,  but  they  may  be  purchased  from  the  booksellers' by  all  who  wish  to  possess  the  store  of  practical  information tnej  contain.
CHAPTEE  IV.
THE  SOURCES  AND  SUPPLY  OF  WATER     ITS  DISTRIBUTION  AND USE  AS  A  MOTIVE  POWER.
The  westerly  winds  which  prevail  in  this  country  carry with  them  the  clouds,  laden  with  aqueous  vapours,  rising from  the  Atlantic  Ocean ;  and,  as  these  cloudi  strike  the ridges  of  hills  on  the  western  side  of  England,  they  dis- charge the  greater  part  of  their  burden  there.
The  greatest  fall  of  rain  takes  place  where  the  lowering rain  cloud  comes  in  contact  with  the  hiU.  Above  that point  little  rain  falls,  and  below  it  the  quantity  is  diminished until  the  vapours  approach  the  general  level  of  the  ground, when  they  condense,  and  the  quantity  of  rain  again  in- creases. The  observations,  made  on  lofty  buildings,  show that  less  rain  falls  on  them  than  on  the  ground  at  their base,  and  that  the  quantity  of  rain  falling  on  the  east  side of  the  island  is  much  less  than  on  the  west  side.
In  the  west  of  Scotland,  and  in  some  places  in  the counties  of  Cumberland,  Westmoreland,  and  Lancaster,  a depth  of  six  feet  of  rain  often  falls  in  the  course  of  the  year, while,  on  the  level  lands  of  Cambridgeshire,  on  the  eastern side  of  England,  the  depth  seldom  exceeds  two  feet.  The same  causes  operate  on  the  continent ;  the  western  coast receives  the  greatest  amount  of  rain,  and  it  lessens  towards the  interior ;  so  that  Eussia  and  Austria  are  dry  climates, when  compared  with  Great  Britam  and  Ireland.  The average  annual  amount  of  rain  at  St.  Fetersburgh,  including also  the  snow  and  haLL  (when  melted),  is  only  18  inches  in depth,  during  a  long  series  of  years.
Mr.  J.  F.  Miller,  in  his  report  on  the  fall  of  rain  in  the lake  districts  of  Cumberland  and  Westmoreland,  shows  that at  Seathwaite,  near  Derwentwater,  242  feet  above  the  sea, there  fell  in  eighteen  months,  from  June  1846,  to  November 1847,  inclusive,  193*69  inches  in  depth  ;  and,  in  the  same period,  at  Styhead,  1290  feet  above  the  sea,  164*12  inches ;
26  SOURCES   AND    SUPPLY   OP   WATER.
at  Seatoller,  1334  feet  High,  155*75  inches ;  and  at  Sparkling Tarn,  1906  feet  high,  183*17  inches.
These  differences  appear  to  have  arisen  from  local  circum- stances, and  the  peculiar  formation  of  the  hiUs,  as  the inference  he  draws  from  a  series  of  experiments  and  obser- vations, is  that,  in  the  locality  where  they  were  made,  the level  of  the  heavily  charged  rain  cloud  would  be  about  2000 feet  above  the  sea,  and  the  greatest  fall  of  rain  be  at  that point.
The  average  quantity  of  rain  falling  in  England  over  the whole  surface  of  the  country  may  be  taken  at  about  three feet  in  depth ;  and  the  quantity  carried  off  by  evaporation, absorption,  and  vegetation,  has  been  found  to  amount  to about  two-thirds  of  the  whole  rain,  snow,  and  hail,  coming from  the  clouds.
In  Ireland  the  case  is  nearly  the  same ;  for,  although  the air  is  moist  with  mists  and  dew,  which  c6nstantly  renew  and refresh  the  verdure  of  the  "Q-reen  Island,"  there  is  but little  difference  in  the  average  quantity  of  rain.  Sir  Eobert Kane,  who  has  carefully  investigated  this  subject,  shows that  it  may  be  taken  at  36  inches,  and  assumes  that 12  inches  of  water  finally  arrive  at  the  sea ;  which  water may,  in  its  course,  become  available  for  the  purposes  of industry,  with  a  force  proportionate  to  the  height  through which  it  falls  as  it  flows  onward.
It  is  written  by  the  wisest  of  men,  "  All  the  rivers  run into  the  sea,  yet  the  sea  is  not  fuU ;  unto  the  place  from whence  the  rivers  come  thither  they  return  again."
Providence  has  furnished  mechanical  power ;  it  is  for  man to  make  it  available.  The  sister  kingdom  is  abundantly supplied  with  the  means ;  and,  although  some  persons  may not  estimate  the  amount  of  water  power  so  highly  as  Sir Eobert  Kime,  yet  he  clearly  shows  that  an  enormous quantity  is  constantly  running  to  waste ;  and  his  map,  which exhibits,  at  one  view,  the  principal  streams,  and  the  eleva- tion of  the  land  in  Ireland,  renders  it  evident  how  much may  be  done  by  applying  this  to  useful  purposes.  He  thus sums  up  his  calculations : —
"The  average  elevation  of  the  surface  of  the  coimtry being  387  feet,  the  water  which  flows  in  our  rivers  to  the sea  has  an  average  fall  of  129  yards ;  and  now,  finally,  we may  calculate  the  total  water  power  of  Ireland.  We  have for  the  total  quantitjr  of  rain  falling  in  a  year  100,712,031,640 cubic  yards ;  of  this  one-third  flows  into  the  sea ;  that  is,
SOUECES   AND   SUPPLY  OP  WATER.  27
83,237,343,880  cubic  yards ;  or  for  each  day  of  twenty-four hours,  91,061,216  cubic  yards,  weighing  68,467,100  tons.
"  This  weight  falls  from  129  yards ;  and  as  884  tons, falling  24  feet  in  twenty-four  hours,  is  a  horse  power,  the final  result  is,  that  in  average  we  possess,  distributed  over the  surface  of  Ireland,  a  water  power  capable  of  acting night  and  day,  without  interruption,  from  the  beginning  to the  end  of  the  year,  and  estimated  at  the  force  of  3227 horses'  power  per  foot  of  fall ;  or,  for  the  entire  average  fall of  387  feet,  amounting  to  1,248,849  horses'  power."
Of  course,  much  of  this  enormous  force  exists  where circumstances  prevent  its  becoming  useM ;  and  much  passes away  in  navigable  rivers,  where  it  cannot  be  applied  with advantage ;  but  there  still  remains  an  immense  amount  of mechanical  power,  available  for  the  purposes  of  industry, and  at  present  unemployed.
Sir  Kobert  calculates  the  water  power  of  the  principal rivers  and  their  tributaries  in  a  very  clear  and  interestmg manner.  But  it  is  not  from  the  rivers  alone  that  the  great mechanical  power  of  water  is  to  be  derived.  Modem practice  has  shown  that,  by  throwing  up  an  embankment across  a  mountain  pass,  or  in  the  gorge  of  a  valley,  which expands  itself  among  the  hills,  large  reservoirs — or  rather artificial  lakes — may  be  formed,  to  receive  the  water  which rolls  down  the  declivities  from  the  bursting  rain  cloud,  and to  store  it  up  for  future  benefit.
Two  of  the  greatest  works  of  this  kind  are,  the  embank- ment of  Lough  Island  Eeavy,  in  Ireland,  by  Mr.  Fairbaim, and  the  Shaw's  Water-works  at  -  Greenock,  in  Scotland,  by Mr.  Thom.
The  mill-owners  on  the  Upper  Bann  were  subject  to  great disadvantages.  They  were  flooded  in  winter,  and  in  summer the  drought  stopped  their  works.  In  order  to  economise the  winter  floods,  which  were  destructive  rather  than  useful, they  consulted  Mr.  Pairbaim,  and  he  thus  reported : —
"  Lough  Island  Eeavy,  which  is  the  best  situated  reser- voir, is  a  natural  lake,  bounded  north  and  south  by  land  of considerable  elevation.  It  has  good  feeders,  which,  with  the overplus  waters  of  the  Eiver  Maddock,  would  give  ample supplies,  and  fill  the  reservoir  once  or  twice  in  the  year. The  present  area  of  the  Lough  is  92 i  statute  acres.  On this  IS  to  be  raised  35  feet  of  water,  which  may  be  drawn down  to  a  depth  of  40  feet  under  that  height.  The  area thus  enlarged  will  be  253  acres,  equal  to  140  acres  35  feet
c2
28  WATER   AS   A   MOTIVE   POWER.
deep  ;  and  113  acres  15  feet  deep  ;  making  a  total  of 287,278,200  cubic  feet  of  water."
This  reservoir  has  been  completed  and  in '  operation  for some  years.
Beckoning  the  interest  of  the  money  expended  upon  the works,  the  cost  of  maintenance,  and  the  expenses  ot  super- intendence and  distribution,  the  annual  charge  amounts to  £700 ;  and  it  is  calculated  that  33  tons  of  water  are supplied  for  one  shilling ;  and  as  12  cubic  feet  per  second fallmg  one  foot  is  a  working  horse  power,  the  value  of  such an  improvement  may  be  estimated.
12  cubic  feet  at  62i  lb. = 750  lb.  X  60  sec.  =
45,000  lb.  falling  one  foot  per  minute ;
33,000  lb.  raised  one  foot  high  per  minute,  being  an effective  horse  power.
12,000  lb.  remaining  are  allowed  for  the  difference between  power  and  effect.
The  Shaw's  Water- works  are  even  more  interesting.  The want  of  water  had  been  long  and  grievously  felt  in  the  town of  Greenock,  where  the  people  had  not  a  sufficient  supply even  for  domestic  use,  and  it  was  generally  believed  that water  sufficient  even  for  sanitary  purposes  could  not  be obtained  in  that  locality,  until  a  survey  was  made  by Mr.  Thom,  who  reported,  that  not  only  might  an  ample supply  be  provided  for  the  use  of  the  inhabitants,  but  that a  hffge  surplus  would  be  applicable  as  mechanical  power and  for  manufacturing  purposes,  "to  an  extent  at  least equal  to  all  the  machinery  then  impelled  by  steam-power in  and  about  G-lasgow."
The  report  is  dated  June  22nd,  1824,  and  the  copy  from which  the  author  extracts  this  information  was  given  to  his valued  friend,  the  late  James  Smith,  of  Deanston,  in  August 1840,  by  Mr.  Thom  himself,  who  has  in  his  own  hand- writing noted  the  few  differences  between  the  original plan  and  the  actual  execution  of  the  works.
In  consequence  of  this  report,  and  under  the  auspices  of Sir  Michael  Shaw  Stewart,  a  joint-stock  company  was  formed for  can'ying  the  plan  into  effect  with  a  capital  of  £31,000, and  an  Act  of  Parliament  was  obtained.
In  April  1827  the  principal  portions  of  the  works  appear to  have  been  completed,  namely,  the  great  reservoir  con- taining 284,678,500  cubic  feet  of  water,  and  covering  about 295  statute  acres  of  land.  The  compensation  reservoir, containing  14,465,900  cubic  feet,  and  covering  about  40
WATER  AS  A  MOTIVE   POWER.  29
acres,  and  an  auxiliary  reservoir  (marked  No.  3  upon  the plans)  holding  4,652,800  cubic  feet,  with  an  area  of  ten acres.
!Five  other  smaller  reservoirs  are  about  to  be  made,  and extended  to  hold  more  than  six  millions  of  cubic  feet,  so  that the  aggregate  quantity  stored  at  once  would  be  310,000',000 cubic  feet  of  water.  The  embankment  of  the  great  reservoir is  60  feet  high,  and  that  of  the  compensating  reservoir 23  feet.
The  main  water-course,  somewhat  more  than  six  miles  in length,  was  at  the  same  time  completed,  and  also  its  branch leading  to  the  eastern  line  of  mills,,  there  being  two  lines, east  and  west,  and  on  the  16th  of  April  1827  the  first  mill received  its  supply  of  water  at  the  rate  of  twelve  hundred cubic  feet  per  minute ;  at  this  rate  both  lines  of  mills are  supplied.  The  available  annual  quantity  of  water  to replenish  the  reservoirs  is  more  than  seven  hundred millions  of  cubic  feet.
The  distinguishing  characteristics  of  "this  scheme"  as Mr.  Thom  calls  it,  are  the  following : — ^Instead  of  erecting miUs  and  factories  on  natural  waterfalls,  on  the  banks  of rivers,  in  remote  and  almost  inaccessible  places, — where immense  capital  must  in  the  first  instance  be  expended  in forming  roads  and  houses  for  the  work-people,  as  well  as  a heavy  and  perpetual  charge  for  carriage  to  and  Jfrom  the seat  of  trade, — the  water  is  carried  by  a  conduit  from  the reservoirs,  to  a  populous  seaport  town,  with  a  redundant unemployed  population,  where  roads,  harbours,  piers,  and everything  requisite  for  the  most  extensive  manufacture  are already  formed.  Besides,  by  thus  forming  artificial  water- fells  on  advantageous  grounds,  every  inch  of  Ml  from  the reservoir  to  the  sea  is  rendered  available,  whereas  by  the former  mode  only  a  very  small  part  of  the  fall  could  in general  be  employed.  In  the  present  case  a  faU  of  612  feet has  been  made  available,  of  which  not  more  than  20  were formerly  occupied  or  thought  capable  of  being  usefully employed.  But  besides  the  advantage  thus  gained  by increasing  the  fall,  a  still  greater  advantage  is  gained  from the  greatly  increased  and  perfectly  uniform  supply  of water,  by  the  adaptation  of  the  various  self-acting  sluices, and  other  simple  and  effective  means  of  regulation.
The  reservoirs  are  large  enough  to  contain  a  full  supply for  six  months,  so  that  the  surplus  of  a  wet  year  may  be stored  up,  to  provide  against  a  dry  season ;   thus  turning
30  BAIN-GAUGES   AND  KESEKVOIRS.
to  account  all  the  water  caught  upon  the  surrounding  hills, the  greater  part  of  which  before  ran  wastefully  to  the  sea.
The  practical  effect  of  the  Shaw's  Water-works  has  been to  place  within  the  suburbs  of  a  populous  town  a  series  of mills  and  factories  driven  by  power  equal  to  that  of  thirty- three  steam-engines  of  fifty  horses  each.
Such  power  beiug  applied  to  manufacturing  purposes, each  factory  will  pay  in  wages  to  the  work-people  about £10,000  a  year,  making  a  total  annual  amount  distributed in  wages  only  of  more  than  £300,000,  and  employing  upwards of  7(X)0  persons,  besides  giving  an  ample  supply  of  water for  the  use  of  the  town.
A  greater  addition  to  the  wealth  of  a  small  communily, in  so  short  a  time,  and  by  such  simple  means,  can  scarcely be  imagined.
CHAPTEE  V.
RAIN-GAUGES  AND  RESERVOIRS.— EMBANKMENTS  AND  THEIR CONSTRUCTION.
The  recognised  importance  of  noting  and  registering  the fall  of  rain,  and  of  observing  other  meteorological  changes during  the  year,  has  led  to  the  establishment  of  such registers  in  several  towns  where  scientific  institutions  or libraries  have  been  formed ;  but  as  there  are  many  localities where  no  observations  are  made  and  registered,  and  as  the fall  of  rain  is  much  affected  by  local  circumstances,  many engineers  have  found  it  necessary,  especially  in  remote  and mountainous  parts  of  the  country,  to  institute  a  series  of observations  for  their  own  information,  previous  to  their designing  or  advising  the  construction  of  important  works, particularly  reservoirs,  catch-water  drains,  and  embankments to  retain  the  water  falling  among  the  hills,  and  to  store  it, either  for  the  supply  of  towns,  for  sanitary  purposes,  or  as  a means  of  obtaining  mechanical  power.
The  water  supply  for  the  populous  and  rapidly  increasing capital  of  the  cotton  manufacture,  Manchester,  and  its neighbourhood,  has  led  to  many  local  observations  among the  ridges  of  hills,  within  reach  as  it  were  of  the  town  (or city  as  it  may  now  be  termed),  where  it  was  supposed  a sufficient  area  of  high  and  sloping  ground  might  oe  found
EAIN-GAUGBS  AND   EESERVOIRS.  81
to  catch  the  rain,  and  afford  the  requisite  water  shed,  from which  a  supply  might  be  gathered  in  the  rainy  months,  and stored  for  use  in  dry  weather.
.  Although  much  pains  was  taken  to  arrive  at  correct  con- clusions, great  discrepancies  appeared  in  the  results  obtained by  persons  whose  character  and  standing  in  the  profession warrant  the  belief  that  their  only  aim  was  to  arrive  at  the truth.  Much  of  the  difference  arose,  doubtless,  from  the  dif- ferent elevations  at  which  those  observations  were  made;  much from  the  formation  of  the  country,  some  spots  being sheltered  from  prevailing  winds,  others  exposed  to  the blast  driving  the  rain  in  masses  before  it,  and  some  where the  eddying  wind  threw  it  down  in  streams,  excessive  even in  that  rainy  district.
But  besides  aU  these  causes  of  difference  between  the observers,  it  was  found  that  even  on  the  same  ground  the results  were  not  the  same;  and  in  these  cases  the  rain- gauges  were  not  like  each  other.
Without  reviving  a  controversy  in  which  personal  feeling sometimes  prevailed  over  scientific  discussion,  it  may  be mentioned  that  some  of  the  rain-gauges  used  were  of  the old  construction ;  wherein  the  rain  is  caught  in  a  funnel, received  in  a  tube,  and  measured  by  a  staff  or  graduated rod,  by  dipping  it  into  the  tube  and  noting  how  much  of  it is  wet,  or  by  the  rod  rising  with  a  float  as  the  rain-gauge fills.
It  is  obvious,  that  when  this  staff  was  left  in  the  instru- ment, projecting,  as  sometimes  happened,  considerably  above the  diflh  or  funnel  head  of  the  instrument,  it  caught  the drifting  rain ;  and  as  the  wind  was  violent  or  otherwise,  so were  the  results  affected :  thus  they  varied  from  the  neigh- bouring rain-gauges,  which  had  no  staff,  and  where  the quantity  of  water  contained  in  it  was  either  read  off  in  a graduated  glass  tube  attached  to  the  instrument,  or  poured into  a  separate  measuring  glass.
:  It  may  be  said  that  such  errors  might  readily  have  been avoided  by  a  little  more  care  and  judgment,  and  something like  uniformity  of  system  in  the  construction  and  position of  instruments,  ana  the  time  and  method  of  observing; but  it  must  be  remembered  that  such  observations  were generally  undertaken  either  by  individuals,  or  by  a  few persons  who  paid  their  own  expenses;  that  the  engineer was  often  obliged  to  depute  his  pupil  or  assistant  to organize,  among  the  natives  of  the  hills,  an  extemporary
32  ^AIN-GAUGES  AND  BESEB.YOIES.
body  of  observers,  by  whom  his  instructions  were  hardly understood,  even  when  he  flattered  himself  he  had  made them  very  clear  and  explicit.
.  The  author  has  before  him  a  series  of  tables,  the  "  Collected observations,  magnetic  and  meteorological,  made  throughout the  extent  of  the  empire  of  Russia,  and  published  annually by  order  of  his  Imperial  Majestv  Mcholas  the  !First."  These observations,  printed  in  French,  are  made  by  the  engineers of  the  mining  corps,  at  their  several  stations;  and  they are  so  copious  and  exact,  that  except  the  observations  made at  Greenwich  under  the  astronomer  royal,  and  perhaps  those at  the  universities,  few  registers  kept  in  England  will  bear comparison  with  the  Russian  tables.  The  rain-gauge  used is  composed  of  two  cylindrical  vases  of  copper,  placed  one above  the  other,  and  communicating  by  a  small  tube ;  the upper  vessel  is  open  at  the  top,  and  is  larger  in  diameter than  the  under  one.  The  rain  water  received  in  the  upper vessel  passes  through  the  pipe  into  the  closed  receiver  below, whence  it  is  drawn  off  by  a  tap  into  a  wide-mouthed  tubular glass  measure,  graduated  in  equal  divisions.  The  rain-gauge is  filled  with  water,  until  it  rises  in  the  upper  cylinder  to  a point  marked  beforehand,  and  then  the  water  is  drawn  off by  the  tap  until  it  has  fallen  an  inch.  It  is  received  in  the cylindrical  measuring  glass  as  it  runs  out  of  the  lower  copper vessel ;  and  if  it  fill  this  glass  13^^  times,  its  total  capacity being  i^  of  an  inch,  or  0*074  in  depth  of  the  upper  vessel, it  is  only  necessary  to  divide  the  glass  into  7^  parts,  to show  the  hundredth  part  of  an  inch  of  rain.
Twice  a  day  the  quantity  of  rain  or  snow  that  fidls  is noted  and  registered,  that  is  at  8  o'clock,  morning  and evening ;  except  in  case  of  a  heavy  shower,  when  the  time, the  duration,  and  the  quantity  of  rain  fallen  are  also  noticed, along  with  the  half-day's  downfall,  and  a  corresponding remark  made.
In  winter  the  rain-gauge  is  taken  into  a  warm  room every  twelve  hours,  to  melt  the  snow  or  hail  received  in  it, and  a  second  iustrument  immediately  put  in  its  place ;  every station  being  provided  with  two  rain-gauges  for  this  purpose.
It  is  obvious  that  such  instruments  as  these  may  be readily  managed  by  private  soldiers,  and  that  correct  results may  be  obtained  without  much  nicety  of  construction,  and without  much  regard  being  paid  to  anv  of  the  dimensions, except  the  divisions  of  the  measuring  glass.
A  very  simple  apparatus  has  been  found  useful  by  the
RATN-GAUGES  AND   RESERVOIRS.  33
author,  where  a  better  could  not  readily  be  obtained.  Let a  tin  funnel  be  made  in  the  form  of  a  shallow  cylinder,  or hoop,  of  13J|-  inches  in  diameter,  equal  in  area  to  one superficial  foot,  and  having  the  bottom  conical,  with  a  pipe of  small  diameter  in  the  centre,  say  three  quarters  of  an inch  or  thereabouts :  fit  this  pipe  into  the  neck  of  a  bottle (a  stone-ware  bottle  is  better  than  a  glass  one),  and  let  it reach  nearly  to  the  bottom  of  the  bottle ;  put  in  a  little water  until  it  rises  above  the  end  of  the  pipe,  to  close  and seal  it  so  as  to  prevent  loss  by  evaporation,  and  the  rain- gauge  is  ready  for  use.
Weigh  the  whole  apparatus  and  note  the  weight ;  then  set it  to  receive  the  rain  that  may  fall  with  the  bottle  sunk  in the  ground,  and  as  the  top  or  mouth  of  the  funnel  is  one Superficial  foot  in  area,  and  a  cubic  foot  of  water  weighs 1000  ounces,  every  ounce  of  water  received  in  the  bottle  is one-thousandth  part  of  a  foot  in  depth  of  rain  fallen.
One  of  the  most  approved  rain-gauges  has  a  funnel  similar to  the  last,  also  a  foot  in  area,  mounted  on  a  stand-pipe which  receives  the  water,  which  should  be  carried  down  to the  bottom  by  a  slender  tube  trapped  with  water  at  the  end, and  the  stand-pipe  has  a  suitable  base  or  foot.  The  rain received  in  the  pipe  is  read  off  by  means  of  a  small  graduated glass  tube  fixed  to  its  side  and  communicating  with  it.  If the  stand-pipe's  section  be  one-tenth  of  a  superficial  foot  in area,  and  the  glass  be  divided  decimaUy,  every  inch  of  water in  the  glass  will  indicate  one-tenth  of  an  inch  of  rain ;  or the  glass  may  be  graduated  hj  trial  to  suit  the  stand-pipe.
A  convenient  portable  rain-gauge  is  also  made  which answers  sufficiently  weU  for  temporary  purposes,  and  shows the  quantity  of  rain  fallen  with  tolerable  accuracy.  It  is made  of  japanned  tin,  something  like  an  ordinary  coffee-pot, and  is  surmounted  with  a  fiinnel  equal  in  area  to  one-fourth of  a  superficial  foot.  The  water  it  receives  is  poured  into  a graduated  measuring  glass,  whose  diameter  or  section  is  so proportioned  to  the  area  of  the  funnel  as  to  indicate  the depth  of  rain  in  inches  and  decimals,  or  the  glass  may  be marked  in  the  same  way  as  those  used  at  the  Eussian  stations before  described.
It  is  better  to  use  any  of  these  modes  than  a  measuring rod^or  staff,  which  often  gives  incorrect  results;  and  the rain-gauge  should  be  set  with  the  mouth  of  the  funnel exactly  in  a  horizontal  plane  or  level,  and  not  exposed  to blasts  or  eddies  of  wind,  nor  sheltered  from  the  ordinarv
0  3
34
EAIN'GAUGES   AND   RESERVOIRS.
breezes,  so  that  its  position  may  correspond  with  the  general surface  of  the  locaHty  and  catch  a  fair  average  of  the  rain.
The  rain-gauge  recommended  for  local  observations  by- Mr.  James  Glaisher,  P.E.S.,  Secretary  to  the  British Meteorological  Society,  is  a  simple  cylindrical  vessel,  eight inches  in  diameter  and  thirteen  inches  high,  sunk  in  the ground  eight  inches,  and  consequently  having  the  top  edge five  inches  above  the  ground.  Into  the  top  or  mouth  of  this vessel  is  fitted  a  funnel,  formed  of  a  plain  inverted  cone  six inches  deep,  the  apex  of  the  cone  ending  in  a  bent  tube  of an  eighth  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  bent  so  as  to  form  a  trap and  prevent  evaporation,  but  yet  discharging  the  water freely  into  the  vessel  below.  Eor  measuring,  he  recommends a  tail  cylindrical  glass  holding  one  inch  of  rain  as  received  in the  gauge,  and  divided  into  ten  parts,  which  may  again  be sub-divided  into  ten  by  using  a  scale.
Fig.  6.
It  is  due  to  Mr.  Glaisher,  to  state  that  having  noticed  the great  want  of  an  accurately  kept  series  of  observations  of atmospheric  and  meteoric  changes  in  this  country,  he  has sedulously  devoted  himself  to  the  establishment  of  local observatories  throughout  the  kingdom.  He  furnishes  the observers  with  formularies,  he  directs  them  in  the  selection of  instruments,  and  he  visits  their  localities  if  needfiil.  He thus  interests  others  in  the  same  useful  labours  he  himself pursues,  and  he  has  succeeded  in  inducing  the  librarians  and secretaries  of  literary  and  scientific  institutions,  mathematical instrument  makers  and  private  gentlemen  to  institute  obser- vations of  this  kind  on  one  general  and  uniform  system. They  transmit  to  him  printed  forms  filled  up,  and  he  arranges
EMBANKMENTS  AND  THEIR   CONSTRUCTION.  85
and  tabulates  them.  Such  works  as  these  cannot  be  too highly  commended;  and  as  the  farmers'  crops  and  land- owners' rents  depend  on  these  changes,  they  will  do  well  to observe  them  also.
Having  thus  shown  how  the  ram  may  be  measured  by  the gauge  and  collected  in  the  reservoir,  confined  by  embank- ments and  regulated  to  supply  the  required  power  to  turn the  mill  and  substitute  mechanical  force  for  manual  labour, let  us  not  forget  the  old  and  homely  proverb,  that  "  Fire and  water  are  good  servants,  but  they  are  bad  masters."
The  weight  of  a  cubic  foot  of  water  being  62^  lb.,  it presses  with  that  force  upon  the  square  foot  of  surface  on which  it  rests,  and  every  foot  in  the  depth  of  water  adds that  force  to  the  pressure;  so  that  if  the  depth  of  a  reser- voir be  54  feet,  every  square  foot  of  ground  at  the  bottom sustains  a  pressure  of  62i  x  54  =  3375  lb.,  or  somewhat more  than  a  ton  and  a  half.  What  care  then  must  be necessary  in  preparing  a  large  area  to  resist  such  a  weight, and  render  it  secure  under  such  a  pressure  !
But  it  is  not  only  in  a  vertical  direction  that  the  pressure of  a  fluid  acts :  it  thrusts  against  the  embankment  with  a general  force  over  the  whole  surface,  equal  on  the  perpen- dicular line  to  half  the  depth  of  the  liquid  column,  in  a  lateral direction,  tending  to  force  it  from  its  place;  and  if  the mound  or  dkm  crossing  the  vallev  be  600  yards  in  length  or 1800  feet,  with  a  depth  of  54  feet  of  water  against  it,  the whole  lateral  thrust  will  be,  taking  it  at  half  the  above  per- pendicular pressure,  more  than  83,000  tons ;  while  the lateral  pressure  exerted  at  the  foot  of  the  embankment  is equal,  or  nearly  so,  to  the  perpendicular  force.
Fifir.  7.
DIAGRAM  TO  SHOW  THB  PRBS8UBB  OF  WATER  AOAINBT  AN  BHBANKHBNT.
These  dimensions  are  not  hypothetical ;  the  author  was  for many  years  in  the  habit  of  wadking,  almost  daily,  along  such an  embankment,  and  he  has  seen  it  at  times  severely  tested
36  EMBANKMENTS  AND  THEIE  CONSTRUCTION.
Let  it  be  remembered  that  in  such,  situations  a  bed  of alluvial  soil  often  rests  upon  clay,  with  water  oozing  between them,  and  that  the  beds  in  such  situations  slope  in  the direction  of  the  valley,  and  conseqilently  in  that  of  the thrust.  This  is  no  uncommon  case,  and  unless  the  greatest judgment  and  foresight  be  exercised  in  forming  such  dams in  the  outset,  they  may  sooner  or  later  yield  to  the  enormous force  pressing  against  them,  and  carry  ruin  and  devastation with  tnem.
The  author  has  seen  railway  embankments,  hastily  raised to  cross  the  valley,  where  an  inclined  substratum  of  clay, lurking  as  it  were  beneath,  intercepted  the  surface  water, and  caused  an  insidious  and  slippery  parting  in  the  measures, slide  as  if  they  had  been  launched^  for  several  yards,  and wrinkling  up  the  green  sward,  to  the  dismay  and  loss  of  the too  clever  contractors  who  risked  such  an  experiment.  But in  making  dams  to  confine  water,  nothing  will  justify  such risk;  and  as  this  little  book  may  fall  into  the  hands  of young  practitioners  in  remote  places,  the  author  strongly urges  that  in  constructing  such  works  nothing  should  be  left to  chance;  that  well  constructed  banks  with  flat  slopes, stout  puddle  walls  and  lining,  earthwork  and  masonry sufficiently  massive  to  resist  unflinchingly  the  greatest possible  amount  of  thrust  they  may  have  at  any  time  to sustain,  should  be  constructed  in  all  cases ;  that  means  of relief  and  discharge  be  provided  to  meet  extraordinary seasons ;  and  that  both  surface  and  substrata  be  carefully bored  and  examined  before  the  works  are  commenced,  and diligently  watched  during  their  progress,  for  great  responsi- bility lies  upon  the  man  who  attempts,  with  insufficient means,  to  restrain  a  destructive  and  overwhelmii^g  torrent.
HORIZO^'TAL  WATER-WHEELS,  37
CHAPTEE  VI.
HORIZONTAL  WATER-WHEELS  AND  SIMILAR  MACHINES.
The  primitive  application  of  water-power  to  turn  mill- stones has  been  noticed  in  the  early  part  of  this  book,  and the  emplojrment  of  horizontal  water-wheels,  with  vertical axles,  is  still  considered  by  French  engineers  to  be  in  many cases  advantageous,  as  presenting  great  simplicity  and economy,  both  in  construction,  maintenance,  and  applica- tion;  as  requiring  but  little  space,  and  in  being  able  to work  in  floods  and  in  frosty  weather.
In  driving  corn-mills  they  need  no  toothed-wheel  work, and  in  besieged  towns  they  can  be  worked  at  all  times without  interfering  with  the  defences,  being  either  placed altogether  out  of  harm's  way,  or  costing  but  little  to  shelter them  from  the  enemy's  fire.
Such  is  the  opinion  of  experienced  officers  of  the  French artillery,  and  we  are  indebted  to  two  of  them — MM.  Piobert and  Tardy — for  an  elaborate  series  of  experiments  and  an excellent  report  on  the  useful  effect  of  the  ordinary horizontal  water-wheel  at  present  used  in  France.  Those on  which  the  experiments  were  made  are  at  Toulouse,  where the  two  dams  {ha/rraaes)  of  the  Q-aronne,  and  the  abundanoe of  water  in  the  canal  of  the  south,  near  its  discharge  into that  river,  have  rendered  disposable  falls  of  water  sufficient to  put  in  motion  a  great  number  of  corn-mills  by  means  of horizontal  water-wheels.  These  wheels  are  of  two  kinds : those  situate  on  the  rivers  are  called  bucket-wheels  {d.  ctwe), and  are  similar  to  what  are  used  at  Cahors,  at  Metz,  and other  places  ;  those  which  are  placed  on  the  canal  are  called whirl-wheels  (rouets  volants),  and  much  resemble  those which  have  existed  from  time  immemorial,  and  are  turned by  the  percussion  of  the  water  upon  curved  floats,  which are  here  used  instead  of  the  ladles  that  are  fixed  round  the axles  of  the  mills  of  the  Alps.
It  mav  here  be  remarked  that  in  Northern  Africa  several rude  mills  are  to  be  found  in  the  same  fashion  as  they  have existed  for  ages,  among  a  people  the  least  advanced  in  the arts  of  industry ;  many  of  them  are  on  the  great  falls  of  the
38  HORIZONTAL  WATER-WHEELS
Eummel  at  Constantineh,  and  instead  of  ladles  these  have pieces  of  wood  rudely  driven  into  the  upright  axle,  like spokes  into  the  nave  of  a  cart-wheel.  A  channel  being  made from  the  river,  at  an  inclination  of  30  or  40  degrees,  the water  is  directed  against  the  side  of  the  wheel,  and  having doue  its  work  it  is  returned  to  the  river  and  employed  again and  again  as  it  descends  the  hill  to  turn  a  series  of  such mills.  In  some  of  these  the  upper  end  of  the  vertical  axle is  fitted  with  a  bent  arm  or  crank,  and  the  miUstone,  which, in  such  cases,  is  fixed  in  an  inclined  position  of  10  or 15  degrees  to  the  horizon,  is  forced  round  by  it.  With these  mills  they  prepare  the  coarse  meal,  which,  being cooked  in  steam,  makes  the  "couscousou,"  the  common  food of  the  natives.
The  localities  at  Toulouse  afforded  ms,nj  favourable  cir- cumstances for  making  experiments,  besides  the  general employment  of  these  two  kinds  of  wheels,  so  that  the  results of  both  could  be  readily  and  exactly  compared  by  the  same dynamometers  and  other  instruments  used  by  the  same observers.
The  results  of  all  the  trials  appear  to  be  that  on  the horizontal  water-wheels  with  buckets  the  effects  produced  at ordinary  speeds  varied  from  15  to  27  per  cent,  of  the  power employed  when  the  mills  and  wheels  were  iu  good  condition. The  speeds  were  varied  from  60  to  135  revolutions  per minute ;  but  the  best  effect  seems  to  have  been  obtained  at about  90  revolutions,  with  a  total  fall  of  water,  measuring the  difference  of  level  above  and  below  the  wheel  of  from seven  to  eight  feet.  The  wheels  were  about  five  and  a  half feet  in  diameter ;  that  of  the  millstones  is  not  stated  in  the report,  but  they  appear  to  have  been  such  as  are  in  general use — ^probably  about  four  and  a  half  feet.  The  water  which drove  these  wheels  was  discharged  through  an  ordinary sluice,  and  passing  through  a  channel  of  stone-work  was thrown  obliquely  on  the  wheel.
The  other  kind  of  horizontal  wheels  experimented  upon was  distinguished  by  the  name  of  ^^ rovsts  volants"  here termed  a  whirl^heel — for  the  term  fly-wheel,  as  we  now  use it,  is  applied  to  a  very  different  piece  of  machinery,  namely, the  massy  cast-iron  regulator  of  steam-engines  and  other heavy  works.
These  wheels  received  the  water  directed  upon  them through  an  inclined  pyramidal  trunk  of  wood  upon  one side  of  the  wheel ;  the  larger  end  of  the  trunk  being  closed,
AND   SIMILAR  MACHINES.
39
or  the  entrance  of  the  water  regulated  by  a  sluice,  against which  was  a  head  of  water  of  fourteen  or  fifteen  feet,  to which  the  inclination  of  the  trunk,  or  about  two  feet  more,
Fig.  8.— Roue  k  Caves.
may  be  added,  so  that  the  ladles  of  the  wheel  were  acted upon  by  the  weight  and  impulse  of  the  water,  and  were  so formed  as  to  continue  such  action  until  the  water  escaped between  them,  and  passed  through  the  wheel. When  these  wheels  made  102  and  108  revolutions  per
40
HORIZONTAL  WATER-WHEELS
minute,  the  useful  effect  was  from  29  to  33  per  cent.,  and when  the  resistance  of  the  work  done  reduced  their  speed to  90  and  85  turns, per  minute,  their  effect  reached  to  39
Fig.  9.— Rouet  Volant.
thb
heav^
These  er  cent,  of  the  power  expended,  the  useful  effect  of through  Bjls  being  nearly  the  same  as  that  of  the  old  under- side of  the  \^\eel.
ANB  SIMILAR  MACHINES.  41
The  difference  in  construction  between  the  two  idnds  of mills  appears  to  be  very  slight,  and  their  dimensions  and cost  to  be  the  same  or  nearly  so ;  but  the  supply  of  water being  abundant,  the  millers  paid  no  attention  to  the  quantity expended  in  performing  a  given  amoiint  of  work.     (See
Fig.  9.)
The  wheels  are  made  of  cast  iron,  and  the  pivot  of  the upright  shaft  stands  upon  a  foot-bridge  or  lever,  fixed  at one  end,  and  regulated  at  the  other  end  by  a  second  lever placed  in  the  mill  above,  so  that  the  millstones  may  be adjusted  to  grind  closer  or  otherwise  in  the  usual  way.
It  is  perhaps  impossible  to  construct  a  more  simple  and less  expensive  com-miU,  where  plenty  of  water  is  at  hand to  drive  it,  and  the  author  has  been  somewhat  diffuse  in explaining  it,  as  there  may  be  many  localities,  especially  in New  Zealand  and  other  colonies,  where  such  sunple  and cheaply  made  mills  would  be  of  great  advantage  to  a  small community  of  settlers.
It  is  however  well  known  to  all  experienced  millwrights, that  a  much  greater  amount  of  useful  effect  is  obtained  when water  acts  by  its  gravity  or  pressure  than  when  it  acts  by its  impulse ;  afid  it  has  been  found  expedient  in  some  places, where  the  millers  desired  to  retain  the  horizontal  wheel  and to  economise  the  expenditure  of  water,  to  vary  its  construc- tion, so  that  the  weight  of  the  water  should  act,  and  that without  impulse.
This  has  been  effected  by  using  as  it  were  two  wheels, one  laid  upon  the  other ;  the  upper  wheel  being  fixed  and immovable,  and  serving  only  to  direct  the  water  against the  vanes  or  buckets  of  the  lower  wheel,  which  is  forced round  by  the  pressure  so  directed  againsi  it.
A  drawing  of  such  a  imll,  the  wheel  5  feet  in  diameter, constructed  in  Italy,  has  been  kindly  forwarded  from  Genoa, and  shows  the  next  iinprovement  made  in  this  useful machine.  It  is  known  in  Erance  and  Germany  as  Koechlin's plan,  and  is  sometimes  wrongly  called  his  turbine.
A  cylinder  is  formed  of  cast  iron,  wrought-iron  plates,  or wood  strongly  hooped,  and  is  made  open  at  the  top,  unless the  millstone  rest  upon  it  when  the  power  is  used  to grind  com.  The  upper  end  of  the  cylinder  is  somewhat higher  than  the  head  of  the  column  of  water  rutended  to  act upon  the  wheel,  the  water  entering  it  through  an  opening on  one  side,  and  the  internal  diameter  as  proportioned  to  the quantity  of  water  to  be  used ;  there  is  a  sluice  to  regulate
u
HORIZONTAL   WATER-WHEELS
SECTIOKAL  SLRVATION.
AND   SIMILAR   MACHINES.  48
the  supply  at  top,  fixed  in  the  pentrough,  and  another  at bottom  which  regulates  the  expenditure ;  the  pressure  of the  atmosphere  on  the  top  is  supposed  to  render  the  whole column  eflfective.  The  fixed  wheel  forms  a  bottom  to  the upper  portion  of  the  cylinder,  which  must  be  firmly  secured to  a  foundation  of  masonry  or  timber.  The  upright  shaft  or axle  is  fitted  into  the  moving  wheel  and  turns  with  it, passing  through  a  collar  properly  bored  and  lined  with  brass, m  the  centre  of  the  upper  or  fixed  wheel;  it  is  steadied and  secured  by  another  collar  formed  on  a  frame  or  bracket, screwed  to  the  top  of  the  cylinder,  which  may  be  dispensed with  if  the  nether  millstone  be  used  instead ;  but,  in  the sketch  here  given,  the  wheel  is  intended  to  turn  other  kinds of  machinery.
It  will  be  obseirved  that,  in  the  present  instance,  the  upper portion  of  the  cylinder,  above  the  fixed  wheel,  is  made  of cast  iron,  and  that  the  lower  part  is  made  of  wrought-iron plates.  The  pressure  of  the  water  is  directed  by  the  vanes  or guide-curves  of  the  upper  wheel  into  the  buckets  of  the  lower one,  so  as  to  bear  upon  them  with  the  greatest  effect,  while, by  the  regulation  of  the  two  sluices  (which  are  not  shown in  the  woodcut),  the  cylinder  is  kept  full,  and  the  descending column  of  water  passes  like  an  eddy  through  the  wheels, with  a  force  proportioned  to  the  whole  height,  for  the  lower end  of  the  cylinder  is  immersed  in  the  water,  which  in ordinary  times  just  covers  the  outgoing  opening,  and  in flood  times  rises  above  it,  so  that  the  power  due  to  the difference  between  the  surfaces  of  the  dam  and  the  tail water  may  always  be  available.
Fig.  11.
SBcnoir. A.  The  fixed  part  with  guide  curves,    b.  The  revolving  part  or  wheel  with  its  buckets.
44
HORIZONTAL  WATER-WHEELS Fig.  12.
PLAN  OF  FIXED  PART  WITH  OUIOB  CURVF.8. Fig.  13.
PLAK  OF  BEVOLVINO  PART  WITH  BUCKETS.
This  combination  is  a  great  improvement  upon  the  wheels at  Toulouse,  before  described ;  and  the  same  principles  have been  further  developed  by  MM.  Fremont,  who  obtained
AND    SIMILAB,  KACHH^ES.  45
the  Council  medal,  at  the  Great  Exhibition  of  1851,  for  their Horizontal  Water-Mill  of  fifty-five  horses'  power,  constructed on  the  system  of  M.  Eontaine  Baron — a  machine  capable  of the  nicest  adjustment,  and  applicable  to  any  manufacture, however  delicate,  as  the  spinning  of  silk  and  fine  yams of  any  kind,  and  giving  a  useful  effect  of  75  per  cent.
In  several  respects  this  resembles  the  last-described, inasmuch  as  there  are  two  wheels  placed  in  the  same manner,  either  at  the  lower  end  of  a  large  iron  cylinder  open at  the  top,  or  at  the  bottom  of  a  cistern  of  strong  woodwork. The  reservoir  or  cistern  intended  to  be  used  for  this  wheel was  about  8  feet  high,  but  it  was  not  exhibited,  as  it  would have  prevented  a  complete  view  of  the  interior  arrange- ments. It  was  therefore  removed,  and  the  upper  work  for regulating  the  sluices,  together  with  the  governor,  were placed  on  a  cast-iron  frame  above,  supported  by  six  pillars. The  upper,  or  fixed  wheel,  had  a  strong  flanch  surrounding it  and  cast  with  it,  having  provision  made  for  securing  it with  screw-bolts  to  the  bottom  of  the  cistern  or  tank,  and beneath  the  revolving,  or  under  wheel  (in  this  case  not included  in  a  cylinder,  as  in  Koechlin's  plan) ;  a  clear  way of  escape  for  the  eflBiuent  water,  after  it  had  done  its  duty, was  left  on  all  sides.  The  fixed  wheel,  thus  attached  by  its fiianch  to  the  bottom  of  the  tank,  was  about  6^  feet  in diameter,  and  had  a  strong  cast-iron  pipe,  about  a  foot  in diameter,  fixed  by  bolts  to  its  centre,  and  rising  up  above the  level  of  the  cylinder  or  cistern,  where  it  was  secured  by a  strong  frame,  serving  to  bind  together  the  whole  fabric and  to  support  the  axis  of  the  revolving  wheel  which  passed through  the  pipe  and  worked  in  a  gun-metal  collar  above.
In  the  fixed  wheel  there  were  forty-two  openings  disposed in  two  concentric  circles ;  the  outer  circle  having  twenty- four,  and  the  inner  circle  eighteen ;  these  openings  radiated from  the  centre  of  the  wheel,  and  were  formed  so  as  to  direct the  water  into  the  buckets  of  the  revolving  wheel  below  it. Tte  outside  diameter  of  the  outer  circle  of  openings  was about  6i  feet,  and  the  inside  diameter  of  the  inner  circle about  3i  feet ;  there  was  a  division,  or  partition  of  an  inch in  thickness,  between  the  two  circular  series  of  openings,  so that  they  might  be  about  8i  inches  long.
Each  of  these  openings  was  fitted  with  a  sluice  made  of cast  iron,  with  the  back  of  it  properly  curved  in  a  vertical direction,  so  as  to  direct  the  water  in  passing  through  the openings  and  lead  it  fairly  into  the  buckets.
46
MM.  FROMONTS     WATER-WHEEL Fig.  14.— Sectional  Elevation.
b^^S^:^___  T_-^.3^nLy  j^i^_  j_-^_^_m^^
AND  SIMILAB  MACHINES.  47
Every  one  of  these  sluices  is  suspended  and  attached  to  a wrought-iron  rod,  about  an  inch  in  diameter,  screwed  into the  sluice,  and  standing  up  about  18  inches.  On  the  top  of fhese  rods  is  secured  a  strong  flat  ring ;  the  rods  are  fitted with  collars,  screws,  and  nuts  to  fasten  them  into  the  ring, or  rather  rings,  for  there  are  two :  that  is  to  say,  one  for  the outer,  and  one  for  the  inner  circle  of  sluices  ana  openings.
Each  of  these  rings  is  suspended  by  three  strong  round rods,  with  regulating  screws  cut  upon  them,  so  that  by means  of  wheel- work  the  two  circles  of  sluices  can  be  simul- taneously raised  and  opened,  or  lowered  and  shut,  at pleasure ;  or  the  openings  may  be  enlarged  or  contracted,  to regulate  the  speed  of  the  machine,  by  adjusting  the  discharge of  water  through  th^m ;  and  this  regulation  is  eflfected  by  a conical  pendulum  or  governor  similar  to  that  of  the  steam- engine.
This  apparatus  of  MM.  Fromont  has  been  improperly termed  a  turbine,  by  which  is  understood  some  wheel  re- sembling th^  shell  so  called,  and  working  by  reaction ;  but it  will  be  clear,  from  the  foregoing  details,  that  it  was,  in fact,  a  horizontal  water-wheel,  in  the  construction  of  which great  ingenuity  and  mechanical  skill  were  displayed.
In  awarding  the  council  medal  to  this  machine,  the  jury mentioned  the  advantages  possessed  by  it,  and  by  similar well-constructed  horizontal  wheels  and  turbines,  of  frequent use  in  France,  but  almost  unknown  in  England.
First, — That  they  occupy  a  smaU  space.  Second, — That turning  very  rapidly,  they  may,  when  used  for  grinding flour,  be  made  to  communicate  the  motion  directly  to  the mill-stones.  Thirdy — Tliat  they  will  work  under  water. Fowrth, — That  they  will  work  equally  well  under  small  and great  falls  of  water.  Fifth, — That  they  yield  when  properly constructed,  and  with  the  supply  of  water  for  which  they have  been  constructed,  a  useful  effect  of  from  68  to  70  per cent. ;  being  an  efficiency  equal  to  that  of  any  other hydraulic  machine.  Sixth, — ^That  the  same  wheel  may  be made  to  work  at  very  different  velocities,  without  materially alteuing  its  useful  effect.
This  last  property  is  one  of  great  importance  in  certain applications,  and  constitutes  an  advantage  of  this  machine over  most  others  that  have  their  established  rates  of working,  from  which  it  is  not  possible  to  deviate  without  a proportionate  sacrifice  of  power.
The  wheel  of  M.  Fontaine  Baron,  made  by  MM.  Fremont
48  MM.  FROMONTS'    HORIZONTAL  WATER-WHEEL.
Fig.  15.
Plan  (one-fourth)  of  the  fixed  part,  showing  the  Guide  Curves  and  six  of  the  Sluices or  Regulators.
Sbctiokal  Elbvation,  broken  to  show  the  form  of  the  Guide  Curves  with  three  of the  Sluices;  also  the  form  of  the  Buckets  in  the  wheel  below.
AND  SIMILA&  MACHINES.  49
and  Son,  appears,  from  experiments  made  on  its  efficiency, to  be  one  of  the  most  successfiil  modifications  of  that  form introduced  into  !Prance  by  Fonmeyron,  in  place  of  the  old horizontal  water-wheel.
There  is  another  simple  and  useful  water-wheel  used  by the  French  in  Guienne  and  Languedoc,  sometimes  called Baue  a  Poire,  or  the  pear-shaped  wheel.  It  is  also  a horizontal  wheel  with  a  vertical  axis  ;  and  when  the  power required  is  not  great,  the  water  plentiful,  and  the  means  of construction  limited,  it  may  often  be  adopted  with  advantage. It  consists  of  an  inverted  cone,  with  spiral  float-boards  of  a curvilinear  form,  winding  round  its  surface.  This  wheel revolves  on  a  pit  or  well  of  masonry,  into  which  it  fits pretly  closely,  like  a  cofiee-mill  in  its  box.  The  water,  con- veyed by  a  spout  or  trunk,  strikes  the  oblique  float-boards, and,  when  it  has  spent  its  impulsive  force,  it  descends  along the  spiral  float-boards  and  continues  to  aid  by  its  weight until  it  reaches  the  bottom,  where  it  is  carried  off  by  a  canal. There  is  considerable  ingenuity  in  this  contrivance  ;  for  the jet  of  water  being  first  applied  to  the  upper,  or  largest  part of  the  cone,  strikes  the  float-boards  at  the  point  where they  move  with  the  greatest  speed,  the  radius  there  being longest ;  but  as  the  water  loses  its  velocity,  in  consequence of  the  motion  it  has  imparted  to  the  ^heel,  it  descends  in the  cone  and  acts  upon  the  floats  lower  down,  where,  the radius  being  less,  they  move  more  slowly ;  and  the  water  is still  beneficially  employed  until  it  quits  the  wheel.
It  is  perhaps  not  necessary  to  describe  the  Danaide  of M.  Dectot,  nor  the  Conchoidal-wheel  of  Euler,  as  neither  of these  are  in  use,  excepting  so  far  as  to  notice  that,  in  the first  of  these,  the  water  acts  in  a  narrow  annular  channel,  at the  circumference  of  the  machine,  formed  between  a  hollow external  and  a  solid  internal  drum,  which  is  also  shallower than  the  outer  one,  and  that  it  is  projected  into  this  hollow ring  or  channel  by  inclined  spouts,  or  jets  forming  tangents to  its  circle,  so  ps  to  drive  it  round,  after  which  it  goes  out at  the  centre,  through  passages  suitably  formed,  so  as  to continue  the  eflect  of  the  water  as  long  as  it  remains  in the  wheel.
In  designing  the  conchoidal  wheel,  the  inventor  seems almost  to  have  discovered,  the  reactionary  effect  of  the effluent  water,  which  has  since  been  made  available  in  the turbine,  that  is  to  say,  the  unbalanced  pressure  opposite  to the  orifices,  impels  the  wheel  somewhat  in  the  same  way
D
50  TUEBINES,  AND   THE  KEACTION   OF
that  a  sky-rocket  is  driven  through  the  air  in  its  rapid flight,  by  the  force  or  recoil  acting  against  the  closed  end  of the  rocket  tube  or  case.  It  does  not  appear,  however,  that this  horizontal  wheel  was  ever  made  practically  useful.
CHAPTEE  VII.
TURBINES,  AND  THE  EEACTION  OP  WATER  PRESSURE  ON WHEELS,  ETC.
Within  the  present  century,  a  new  mode  of  applying  the power  of  water  to  produce  circular  motion  has  been  intro- duced, and  of  late  years  it  has  attracted  much  attention,  and received  many  improvements :  hitherto  it  has  been  but  little used  in  England;  but  in  Germany,  in  France,  and  in America,  it  has  been  very  successfully  employed.
It  is  chiefly  to  German  engineers  and  mathematidans that  we  owe  the  investigation  of  the  principles  on  which  the turbine  is  constructed,  and  the  best  methods  of  reducing them  to  practice.  The  Erench,  also,  have  been  prompt  to appreciate  the  value  of  the  turbine :  M.  Arago  has  given  his testimony  as  to  its  merits,  and  other  French  writers  of  note have  examined  it  in  detail ;  but  we  have  no  complete  work  in the  English  language,  except  a  translation  from  the  German of  Professor  Moritz  Euhlmann,  edited  by  Sir  Eobert  Kane, and  rendered  valuable  to  practical  men  by  his  observations.
In  order  that  the  subject  of  this  chapter  may  be  better elucidated,  and  traced  from  its  first  elements,  it  may  be proper  to  notice  the  philosophical  toy  which  figures  in  many woAs  on  hydrostatics  and  hydraulics,  as  Dr.  Barker's  mill, but  is  by  most  persons  passed  over  as  a  mere  plaything, useless  for  practical  purposes ;  it  involves,  however,  principles of  action  which,  when  well  and  scientifically  carried  out,  lead to  most  important  results.
Dr.  Barker's  mill  consists  of  an  upright  pipe  or  tube,  with a  ftmnel-shaped  open  top,  but  closed  at  the  lower  end ;  and from  the  lower  end  project  two  horizontal  pipes  or  arms, also  closed  at  the  outer  ends,  and  placed  opposite  to  each other,  at  right  angles  with  the  vertical  tube,  so  as  to  form a  cross.    Near  to  the  end  of  each  horizontal  pipe,  and  cm
WATBE  PKBSSUEE  ON  WHEELS,   ETC.
51
one  side  of  it,  is  a  round  hole,  the  two  holes  being  opposite to  each  other.  The  upright  pipe  is  mounted  upon  an  axis  or spindle,  and  is  kept  full  of  water  flowing  into  the  top.
The  water,  issuing  from  the  holes  on  the  opposite  sides  of the  horizontal  arms,  causes  the  machine  to  revolve  rapidly on  its  axis,  with  a  velocity  nearly  equal  to  that  of  the eflBiuerit  water,  and  with  a  force  proportionate  to  the  hydro- static pressure  given  by  the  vertical  column,  and  to  the  area of  the  apertures ;  for  there  is  no  solid  suiface  at  the  hole on  which  the  lateral  pressure  can  be  exerted,  while  it  acts with  its  full  force  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  area.  (See Pig.  16.)
Fig.  16.
D  2
52  TX/BBINES,   AND  THE  REACTION   OP
This  unbalanced  pressure,  according  to  Dr.  Eobison,  is equal  to  the  weight  of  a  column  having  the  orifice  for  its base,  and  twice  the  depth  under  the  surface  of  the  water  in the  trunks  for  its  height.
This  measure  of  the  height  may  seem  odd,  because  if the  orifice  were  shut,  the  pressure  on  it  is  the  weight  of  a column  reaching  from  the  surface.  But  when  it  is  open,  the water  issues  with  nearly  the  velocity  acquired  by  falling from  the  surface,  and  the  quantity  of  motion  produced is  that  of  a  column  of  twice  this  length,  moving  with  this velocity.  This  is  actually  produced  by  the  pressure  of  the fluid,  and  must,  therefore,  be  accompanied  by  an  equal reaction.
When  the  machine,  constructed  exactly  as  before  described, moves  round,  the  water  which  issues  descends  on  the  vertical trunk,  and  then,  moving  along  the  horizdhtal  arms,  partakes of  the  circular  motion.
This  excites  a  centrifugal  force,  which  is  exerted  against the  ends  of  the  arms  by  the  intervention  of  the  fluid.
The  whole  fluid  is  subjected  to  this  pressure,  increasing for  every  section  across  the  arm,  in  the  proportion  of its  distance  from  the  axis ;  and  every  particle  is  pressed with  the  accumulated  centrifugal  forces  of  all  the  sections that  are  nearer  to  the  axis;  every  section,  therefore, sustains  an  equal  pressure,  proportional  to  the  square  of  its distance  from  the  axis.  This  increases  the  velocity  of  efflux, and  this  increases  the  velocity  of  revolution ;  their  mutual co-operation  would  seem  to  terminate  in  an  infinite  velocity of  both  motions  ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  this  circular  motion must  be  given  even  to  every  particle  of  water,  as  it  enters the  horizontal  arm.  This  can  only  be  done  bv  the  motion already  in  the  arm,  and  at  its  expense.  Thus  there  must  be a  velocity  which  cannot  be  over-passed,  even  by  an  unloaded machine.  But  it  is  also  plain,  that  by  making  the  horizontal arms  very  capacious,  the  motion  of  the  water  to  the  jet  may be  made  very  slow,  and  much  of  this  diminution  of  circular motion  prevented.
Dr.  DesaguHers,  Euler,  John  Bernoulli,  and  M.  Mathon  de la  Cour,  have  treated  of  this  machine ;  and  the  latter  author proposes  to  bring  down  a  large  pipe  from  an  elevated reservoir,  to  bend  the  lower  part  of  it  upwards,  and  to introduce  into  it  a  short  pip6  with  two  arms  like  Dr.  Barker's mill  reversed,  and  revolving  on  an  upright  spindle  in  the same  maimer;  the  joint  between  the  two  pipes  being  so
WATBE  PEBSSURE   ON   WHEELS,   ETC.
58
contrived  as  to  admit  of  a  free  circular  motion  without much  loss  of  water.  By  this  arrangement,  a  fall  or  column of  water  of  any  height,  however  great,  may  be  rendered available.  This  arrangement  was  proposed  in  1775.  Some few  jrears  ago,  Mr.  James  Whitelaw,  of  Paisley,  attempted the  improvement  of  this  machine,  and  took  a  patent  for  his improvement,  of  which  he  published  an  account  in  1845. This  would  seem  to  consist  chiefly  of  the  modifications  recom- mended by  Dr.  Bobison  and  M.  Mathon  de  la  Cour,  and  of the  bending  of  the  two  horizcmtal  arms  into  the  form  of  the capital  letter  S:  the  water  being  discharged  from  the  ends of  the  arms,  in  the  direction  of  the  circle  traced  by  their revolution,  or  in  that  of  a  tangent  to  it.  The  curvature  is that  of  an  Archimedean  spiral,  with  the  extremity  of  the  arm or  jet  piece  continued  for  a  short  distance  in  a  circular curve,  coincident  with  the  circle  described  by  the  end  of  the arm.  The  utility  of  this  continuation,  however,  seems  to  be questionable.
The  wood-cuts  show  the  method  of  striking  the  spiral curves  to  form  the  arm  and  a  section  of  the  machine.
Fig.  18.
Fig.  19,
The  capacity  of  the  hollow  arms  is  increased  as  they approach  the  centre  of  rotation,  so  as  to  contain  a  quantily of  water  at  every  section  of  the  arm  inversely  proportionate to  its  velocity  at  that  section,  so  that  little  of  the  centrifugal force  may  be  lost.  The  engravings  show  an  elevation  and plan  of  Mr.  Whitelaw*  s  machine,  and  the  method  he  pro- poses for  forming  the  arms.  The  curvature  is  that  of ^n  Archimedean  spiral,  with  the  extremity  of  the  arm  or  jet piece  continued  for  a  short  distance  on  a  circular  curve. The  utility  of  this  continuation,  however,  seems  somewhat doubtful.
54
TUKBIKES,  Aim  SEAOTION  WHEBLS.
The  sections  of  the  arms  are  everywhere  paraUelo^nuns of  equal  depth,  but  of  breadth  increasing  %x>m  the  jet  at the  extremity  of  the  arm  to  the  centre  of  the  machine.  (See fig.  20.)
A  model  water-mill  of  the  form  shown  in  these  figures, working  with  a  fall  of  10  feet,  the  diameter  of  the  circle described  by  the  arms  being  15  inches,  and  the  aperture  of each  jet  2*4  inches  in  depth  by  '6  of  an  inch  in  width,  the area  of  each  orifice  being  l'44i  inches ;  the  expenditure  of water  was  38  cubic  feet,  the  velocity  387  revolutions  per minute,  and  it  gave  an  effect  equal  to  73*6  per  cent,  of  the power  employed.
Mr.  Whitelaw  states  that  the  machine  is  most  effective when  the  jets  or  ends  of  the  arms  revolve  with  a  velocity equal  to  that  acquired  by  a  heavy  body  falling  through  the height  of  the  vertical  column.
The  model  uBed  in  this  instance  was  well  made  and  the experiments  carefully  conducted,  but  Mr.  Whitelaw  states that  he  has  obtained  nearly  equal  results  in  actual  practice on  the  large  scale.
It  will  be  observed  that  in  the  employment  of  water  of considerable  altitude,  a  great  force  will  be  exerted  against the  moving  part  of  the  machine,  tending  to  lift  it  up  from its  seat ;  it  has  therefore  been  proposed  by  M.  Eedtenbacher,
Professor  of  Mechanism  at Carlsruhe,  to  obviate  this inconvenience  when .  high fells  are  used,  by  making  the axis  horizontal  and  fixing upon  it  two  machines,  in- troducing the  water  between them  by  means  of  a  pipe formed  like  the  letter  T ;  so that  equal  pressures  acting in  opposite  directions  may counteract  and  neutralise each  other. The  axis  or  spindle  connecting  the  two  machines,  and passing  through  the  transverse  pipe,  is  kept  in  a  state  of tension  by  the  di  verging  forces.     (See  Fig.  21.)
The  author  was  indebted  to  Professor  Weddmg,  of  Berlin, for  the  first  authentic  information  he  received  respecting  the turbine,  as  also  for  a  sketch  and  the  dimensions  of  one  of these  machines,  then  recently  erected  under  M.  Wedding's
Fig.  21.
MR.   WHITRLaVs   MIJiL.
55
Fig.  20.
56  TURBINES,   AND  THE   EBACTION   OP
direction.  The  fall,  or  rather  the  head,  of  water  acting upon  it  was  20  feet,  the  diameter  of  the  wheel  3  feet  8  inches, the  speed  115  revolutions  per  minute,  and  the  power  equal to  42  horses,  which  drives  eight  pairs  of  ordinary  millstones, with  all  the  requisite  dressing  machinery.  Professor  Wedding afterwards  sent  the  author  from  Berlin  a  treatise  on  this subject  which  he  had  written  in  conjunction  with  M.  Car- liczeck,  wherein  several  other  similar  machines  are  described, and  the  useful  effect  of  the  water  is  stated  at  from  68  to  80 per  cent.     (See  Fig.  22.)
It  will  be  seen  that  the  great  value  of  the  turbine  con- sists in  its  being  applicable  to  falls  of  water  so  high  or  so low  that  an  ordinary  water-wheel  cannot  be  used ;  and  also that  in  falls  of  great  height  the  velocity  of  the  machine  is  so rapid,  that  when  applied  to  drive  spinning  machinery,  it needs  no  mill  work,  or  but  very  little,  to  bring  it  to  the requisite  speed.
The  invention  of  the  turbine,  properly  so  called,  belongs to  M.  Foumeyron,  and  in  its  present  form  it  generalTv consists  of  a  horizontal  water-wheel,  in  the  centre  of  which the  water  enters ;  diverging  from  the  centre  in  every  direc- tion, it  enters  every  bucket  at  once  and  escapes  at  the  cir- cumference or  external  periphery  of  the  wheel.  The  water acts  on  the  buckets  of  the  revolving  wheel  with  a  pressure proportionate  to  the  vertical  column  or  height  of  the  fall, and  it  is  led  or  directed  into  these  buckets  by  stationary guide  curves,  placed  upon  and  secured  to  a  fixed  platform, within  the  circle  of  the  revolving  part  of  the  machine.  The efflux  of  the  water  is  regulated  bv  ahoUow  cylindrical  sluice, to  which  a  number  of  stops,  actmg  simultaneously  between the  guide  curves,  are  fixed.
With  this  short  cylinder  or  hoop,  they  are  all  raised  or lowered  together  by  means  of  screws  communicating  with  a regulator  or  governor,  so  that  the  opening  of  the  sluice  and stops  may  be  increased  or  diminished  in  proportion  as  tibe velocity  of  the  wheel  may  require  to  be  accelerated  or retarded^
This  cylindrical  sluice  alone  might  serve  to  regulate  the efflux  of  the  water,  but  the  stops  serve  to  steady  and  support the  guide-curves  and  prevent  tremor.
Turbines  may  be  considered  as  divided  into  two  classes, — the  low  pressure  and  the  high  pressure.  The  engravings will  better  explain  the  construction  of  these  machmes  and the  arrangement  of  their  parts  than  a  longer  verbal  de- scription.
WATER  PRESSUBR  ON  WH|!ELS^   ETC.  57
M.' I*oumeyron,  who  began  his  experiments  in  1823, erected  his  first  turbine  in  1827,  at  Pont  sur  I'Ognon,  in France.  The  result  far  exceeded  his  expectations,  but  he had  much  prejudice  to  contend  with,  and  it  was  not  until 1834  that  he  constructed  another,  in  Franche  Comte,  at  the iron-works  of  M.  Garon,  to  blow  «.  furnace.  It  was  of  seven or  eight-horses  power,  and  worked  at  times  with  a  fall  of only  nine  inches.  Its  performance  was  so  satisfactory  that the  same  proprietor  had  afterwards  another  of  fifty-horses power  erected,  to  replace  two  water-wheels  which,  together, were  equal  to  thirty-horses  power.
The  fell  of  water  was  4  feet  3  inches,  and  the  useful  effect, yaried  with  the  head  and  the  immersion  of  the  turbine,  from W  to  80  per  cent.
Several  others  were  now  erected :  two  for  falls  of  seven feet ;  one  at  Inval,  near  Gisors,  for  a  fidl  of  6  feet  6  inches, the  power  being  nearly  forty-horses,  on  the  river  Epte,  ex- penaing  35  cubic  feet  of  water  per  second,  the  useful  efiect being  71  per  cent  of  the  force  employed.
One  with  a  fall  of  63  feet  gave  75  per  cent. ;  and  when  it had  the  full  head  or  colunm  for  which  it  was  constructed,-^ namely,  79  feet, — its  useful  effect  is  said  to  have  reached 87  per  cent,  of  the  powers  expended.
Another,  with  126  feet,  gave  81  per  cent. ;  and  one  with 144  feet  fall  gave  80  per  cent.
At  the  instance  of  M.  Arago,  a  comjxdssion  of  inquiry  was instituted  by  the  Government  of  France,  and  examined  the turbine  of  Inval,  near  Paris,  the  total  fall  of  water  being 6  feet  6  inches,  as  has  been  before  mentioned.  By  putting a  dam  in  the  river,  below  the  turbine,  so  as  to  raise  the  tail water  and  diminish  the  head  to  3  feet  9  inches,  the  effect was  still  equal  to  70  per  cent. ;  with  the  head  diminished  to 2  feet,  the  effect  was  64  per  cent. ;  and  when  the  head  was reduced  to  10  inches,  it  gave  58  per  cent,  of  the  power expended,  notwithstanding  the  great  immersion  of  the machine.
In  the  year  1837,  M.  Foumeyron  erected  a  turbine  at St.  Blasier  (St.  Blaise),  in  the  Black  Forest  of  Baden,  for  a fall  or  column  of  water  of  72  feet  (22  metres).  The  wheel is  made  of  cast-iron  with  wrought-iron  buckets ;  it  is  about 20  inches  in  diameter,  and  weighs  about  105  lbs. ;  it  is  said to  be  equal  to  fifty-six  horses  power,  and  to  give  a  useful effect  equal  to  70  or  75  per  cent,  of  the  water  power  em- ployed.   It  drives  a  spinning-mill  belonging  to  M.  d*£ichtal.
d3
5S  TURBINES,  AND  BEAGTION  WHEELS.
A  second  turbine,  at  the  same  establishment,  is  worked  l^  a column  of  water  of  108  metres,  or  354  feet  high,  which  is brought  into  the  machine  by  cast-iron  pipes  of  18  inches diameter  of  the  local  measure,  or  about  16i  inches  English. The  diameter  of  the  water-wheel  is  14^,  or  about  13  inches English,  and  it  is  said  to  expend  a  cubic  foot  of  water  per second ;  probably  the  expenditure  may  be  somewhat  mcs^ than  this.
The  width  of  the  water-wheel  across  the  pier  is  '225  or less  than  a  quarter  of  an  inch.  It  makes  &om  2200  to  2300 revolutions  per  minute ;  and  on  the  end  of  the  spindle,  or upright  shaft,  of  the  turbine,  is  a  bevilled  pinion,  of  nineteen teeth,  working  into  two  wheels,  on  the  righ^  and  left,  each of  which  has  300  teeth.  These  give  motion  to  the  nuh chinery  of  the  factory,  and  drive  8OI0O  water  spindles,  roving frames,  carding  engines,  cleansers,  and  other  accessories. The  useful  effect  is  reported  to  be  from  80  to  86  per  cent,  of the  theoretical  water  power.  The  water  is  filtered  at  the reservoir  before  it  enters  the  conduit  pipes ;  and  it  is  im- portant to  notice  this,  since  the  apertures  of  discharge  in the  wheel  are  so  small  as  to  be  easily  obstructed  or choked.
The  water  enters  the  buckets  in  the  direction  of  the tangent  to  the  last  element  of  the  guide-curves,  which  is  a tangent  to  the  first  element  of  the  curved  buckets.  The water  ought  to  press  steadily  against  the  curved  buckets, entering  them  without  shock  or  impulse,  and  quitting  them without  velocity,  in  order  to  obtain  the  greatest  useful effect ;  otherwise  a  portion  of  the  water's  power  must  be wasted  or  expended,  without  producing  useful  effect  on  the wheel.  The  engravings  show  a  section  of  this  turbine,  and a  quadrant  of  its  water-wheel,  drawn  to  a  scale  of  one  half of  the  actual  size.
It  is  difficult  to  imagine  that  a  machine  so  small  as  this can  give  motion  to  the  works  of  a  cotton  mill,  on  so  large  a scale.  Professor  Buhlmann  says,  that  when  he  saw  it actually  doing  so,  he  could  not,  for  some  time,  credit  the evidence  of  lus  senses ;  and,  although  he  went  purposely  to examine  it,  his  astonishment  prevented  him  from  compre- hending, in  the  first  instance,  that  the  &ct  was  really  as  it appeared.
There  are  many  places,  especially  in  hilly  districts,  where high  falls  of  water  are  found,  and  where  the  nature  of  the ground  affords  facilities  for  making  reservoirs,  so  as  to
LOW  PEBSSUBB  TORBINB.
5^
o
ltJ..li.L«.ii=
SeeiU  of  Weeh
60  TURBINES,  AND  KBACTION  WHEELS,
ensure  a  constant  supply,  where  the  height  of  the  column  of water  may  compensate  for  the  smallness  of  its  volume. In  such  situations  it  may  be  conveyed  in  pipes  to  the  high- pressure  turbine,  which  may  often  be  applied  with  advantage for  grinding  com,  working  threshing  machines,  or  for crushing  ore,  and  other  purposes.  There  are  other  situations in  which  a  great  volume  of  water  roUs,  with  but  little  fall, and  it  has  been  shown  that,  with  a  head  of  only  nine  inches, the  low-pressure  turbine  has  done  good  service.
The  illustrations  here  given,  as  explanatory  of  the  pro- gress and  construction  of  the  turbine,  are  an  elevation  and plan  of  Dr.  Barker's  mill ;  an  elevation  and  plan  of  Mr. Whitelaw's  mill;  and  diagrams,  showing  the  method  of striking  the  spiral  curves  to  form  the  arms ;  with  a  section, showing  how  the  mill  is  connected  with  the  supply-pipe; the  loose  collar  is  pressed  upwards  against  the  revolving part  of  the  machine  by  three  bow  springs,  fixed  between  the flanches ;  the  coUar  is  prevented  from  revolving,  by  a  steady pin ;  and  the  parts  in  contact  are  ground  together  to  be water-tight.
A  sectional  elevation  of  a  low-pressure  turbine,  with  one of  the  three  screws  for  raising  and  lowering  the  circular sluice  (with  plan).  The  screws  are  connected,  and  act together,  by  means  of  toothed  wheels.     (See  fig.  22.)
Also  a  plan  of  the  water-wheel,  the  guide  curves,  and  a portion  of  the  circular  sluice.  The  curved  buckets,  which are  made  of  thin  plate-iron,  are  screwed  against  loose  blocks or  pieces  of  cast-iron ;  and  these  are  secured,  by  means  of screw-bolts,  within  the  rim  of  the  water-wheel.
The  turbine  of  St.  Blasier,  shown  in  section.  The  body of  the  machine  is  of  cast-iron ;  the  wheel  is  of  hammered iron ;  and  the  spindle,  or  axis,  of  steel.  (See  Eig.  23.) The  letters  refer  to  the  same  parts  on  plan.    (See  Fig.  24.)
The  foot  of  the  spindle,  and  the  pivot  and  step  on  which  it revolves,  are  tempered,  to  extreme  hardness.  The  oil-pipe at  the  foot  of  the  pivot  is  connected  with  a  small  force-pump, or  syringe,  which,  at  regular  intervals,  injects  a  little  oil into  the  step  for  lubrication.  The  pump  is  worked  by  a slow  motion  from  the  machinery.
In  all  cases  it  is  necessary  that  the  foot  of  the  spindle shall  be  made  hollow,  and  run  upon  a  fixed  pivot.  The spindle  must  never  run  in  a  hollow  step.  The  pivot  should be  ^uite  cylindrical,  and  it  should  truly  fit  the  spindle,  with as  little  play  as  possible ;  the  top  of  the  pivot  should  be  but
HIGH   PSESSUBB  TURBINE ;   ST.  BLASIEB.  61
Fig.  28.
62  TUEBINDS,  AND  THE  REACTION  OP
very  slightly  convex.    The  water  and  mud  must  be  carefiilly excluded,  and  the  parts  regularly  oiled.
A  quadrant  or  fourth  part  of  the  wheel,  with  the  guide curves,  and  the  sluice  or  regulator  of  the  turbine  of  St. Blasier.  This  en§;raving  is  one-half  of  the  natural  or  full size  of  the  machme  itself;  the  bent  arrow  shows  the direction  in  which  the  wheel  revolves.
Fig.  24.
There  is  also  another  difference  in  the  construction  of turbines  which  should  be  noticed.  Some  have  been  made which  receive  the  water  at  their  circumference  and  discharge at  their  centre.  Several  of  these  have  been  erected  in  the United  States,  and  have  worked  very  well ;  but  the  amount of  duty  done  by  a  given  quantity  of  water  is  not  so  great as  when  it  is  admitted  at  the  centre  and  escapes  at  the  cir- cumference, where  it  can  do  so  more  freely.  It  is  therefore unnecessary  to  go  very  minutely  into  the  details  of  this machine,  which  is  like  Mr.  Appold's  centrifugal  pump,  so
WAIEE  PSESSI7BB  ON  WHEELS,  ETC.
63
much  noticed  in  the  Great  EzJiibition,  but  with  its  action reversed ;  so  that  the  pump  becomes  a  water-wheel  driven round  by  the  external  pressure  of  the  water,  like  a  whirlpool or  vortex.     (See  Pig.  25.)
Some  wheels  on  this  principle  have  been  erected  near Belfast,  with  good  effect,  07  Mr.  James  Thomson,  who  read a  paper  respecting  them  at  the  meeting  of  the  British Association  there.  The  velocity  of  these  wheels  at  their circumference  was  equal  to  that  of  a  heavy  body  &lling  from a  height  of  half  the  vertical  column  of  water  upon  the wheel.
Fig.  26.    Section.
Plan. VoBTBx  Wheel.
The  reciprocating  water-pressure  engine  —  a  machine which  has  oeen  too  much  neglected  in  England,  will  be treated  of  in  a  future  chapter.
64  UNBBESHOT  WATBE-WHEBLS,
CHAPTEE  VIII.
yNDERSHOT  WATER-WHEELS,  THEIR  USEFULNESS  IN  A  NEW COUNTRY  TO  SAW  TIMBER,  ETC.
The  primitive  form  and  use  of  vertical  wheels  for  raising water  for  the  irrigation  of  land  in  China  and  the  East,  has been  already  noticed.  These,  simply  dipping  their  floats into  a  river,  were  turned  by  the  current  with  such  velocity and  force  as  the  stream  might  impart  to  them.
Tet,  before  quitting  this  part  of  the  subject,  it  may  be proper  to  mention  two  modes  of  applying  these  wheels which  have  been  practised  in  America,
One  of  them  was  to  place  a  strong  axle  across  a  boat,  or some  other  vessel,  of  large  dimensions,  with  a  water-wheel at  each  end  of  this  axle,  like  the  paddle-wheels  of  a  steam- boat ;  and  this  vessel  being  moored  in  a  current,  the  wheels revolved,  and  gave  motion  to  mill-stones,  and  machinery  for grinding  and  dressing  flour,  on  board  the  floating  mill. The  other  was  by  means  of  a  similar  axle  and  a  pair  of wheels,  thus  mounted  in  a  boat,  to  cause  the  boat  so  fitted to  warp  itself,  and  to  tow  other  boats  up  a  rapid,  by  winding one  end  of  a  rope  round  the  axle,  the  other  end  being  made fast  to  an  anchor,  or  other  mooring,  above  the  rapid.  This means  of  ascending  rapids  in  the  American  rivers  has  been
fenerally  superseded  by  the  employment  of  powerful  steam- oats  ;  but  it  is  worthy  of  being  recorded  as  an  ingenious contrivance  to  derive  from  the  resisting  medium  itself  a power  to  overcome  it,  by  duly  proportioning  the  diameters of  the  wheels  and  axles.
The  next  improvement  was  an  important  one  ;  and  it rendered  the  vertical  water-wheel  a  powerful  mechanical agent.
By  penning  back  the  stream  with  a  dam  or  barrier, thrown  across  its  channel,  so  as  to  accumulate  and  raise  the water  to  a  head  ;  and  by  cutting  a  canal,  or  water-course, in  the  bank,  communicating  with  the  reservoir  so  formed, and  re-entering  the  river  by  its  side  at  a  lower  level ;  by erecting  the  wheel  in  this  water-course,  and  by  interposing
UKDEBSHOT  WATBK-WHABtlS.  65
a  sluice  between  the  wheel  and  the  pent-up  water,  so  as  to stop  or  regulate  its  efflux,  the  whole  power  of  the  water^ heretofore  spread  over  the  bed  of  the  river,  might  be  con- centrated against  the  wheel,  rushing  through  the  opening  of the  sluice,  with  a  velocity  and  impulse  due  to  its  head  and volume,  and  acting  upon  the  float-boards  with  an  amount  of force  and  effect  which  could  not  be  obtained  in  the  open river ;  the  water  being  now  confined  between  walls  of  solid masonry  almost  in  contact  with  the  wheel,  and  within  which it  revolved.
These  walls  also  served  to  support  the  axis  of  the  wheels and  to  retain  the  sluice ;  while  a  pavement  of  heavy  stones below,  between  the  walls,  prevented  the  water  from  escaping beneath  the  wheel  until  it  had  done  its  duty.
When  the  sluice  was  shut  down  and  the  wheel  stood  still, until  the  dam  was  filled  to  overflowing,  the  water  passed over  the  barriers  or  weir,  and  rolled  on,  as  before,  though its  old  channel  in  the  river,  or  was  discharged  into  it  through a  waste-water  sluice,  sometimes  made  self-acting  by  means of  a  balanced  float,  or  some  similar  contrivance ;  and,  on adapting  such  apparatus,  great  ingenuity  has  often  been displayed,  especially  in  the  Shaw*s  Water-works,  already mentioned,  as  well  as  by  some  of  the  Trench  engineers.
Arrangements  like  these,  so  simple,  so  effective,  and  so easily  made  and  managed,  rendered  the  Uitdeeshot- wheel most  useful  and  valuable  as  a  means  of  obtaining  mechanical power  sufficient  to  drive  extensive  flour-mills,  fulling-mills^ and  forges,  for  which  purposes  it  was,  in  the  first  instance, chiefly  used,  to  aid  an  agricultural  population  in  more Teadily  supplying  themselves  with  bread,  woollen  cloth,  and iron — ^the  principal  requirements  of  a  primitive  communityj with  whom  spinning  and  weaving  were  as  yet  domestic employments.
The  sluice,  which  regulated  or  closed  the  opening  through which  the  water  issued  against  the  wheel,  was  placed  as  low as  possible,  allowing  oidy  sufficient  fall  or  space  for  the ' escape  freely  after  it  had  passed  the  wheel,  so  that  it  might not,  as  a  millwright  would  say, "  be  working  in  back  water." The  opening,  or  the  sluice,  corresponded  m  size,  or  nearly so,  with  the  width  of  the  float  boards  of  the  wheel,  and the  head  of  water  above  it  caused  the  stream,  or  rather  the jet,  to  strike  the  float-boards  with  a  proportionate  momentum, the  wheel  receiving,  as  it  were,  a  succession  of  impulses  as the  float-boards  continually  entered  the  water.
66  ITimSBSHOT  WATEB-WHEEIS.
Mr.  Jolm  Smeaton,  the  most  experienced  and  eminent, engineer  of  his  time,  made  a  series  of  careful  and  elaborate experiments  on  the  power  and  effect  of  water  employed  to turn  mills,  by  means  of  undershot  and  overshot-wheels. Accounts  of  these  experiments,  with  all  their  details  and results,  were  submitted  by  him  to  the  Eoyal  Society  and printed  in  their  Transactions ;  the  first  of  these  papers,  read Wore  the  Society  on  the  3rd  and  10th  of  May,  1,759,  relates to  undershot- wheels,  and  his  definition  of  mechanical  power and  effect  is  so  clear  and  concise,  that  it  would  be  difficult to  give  a  better  explanation.    He  says  :—
**  The  word  power ^  as  used  in  practical  mechanics,  I apprehend  to  signify  the  exertion  of  strength,  gravitation, impulse  or  pressure,  so  as  to  produce  motion :  and  by  means of  strength,  gravitation,  impulse  or  pressure,  compounded with  motion,  to  be  capable  of  producing  an  effect :  and  that no  effect  is  properly  mechanical  but  what  requires  such  a kind  of  power  to  produce  it,"
"  The  raising  of  a  weight,  relative  to  the  height  to  which it  can  be  raised  in  a  certain  time,  is  the  most  proper  measure of  power,  or,  in  other  words,  if  the  weight  raised  be  multi-» plied  by  the  height  to  which  it  can  be  raised  in  a  given time,  the  product  is  the  measure  of  the  power  raising  it, and  consequently  all  those  powers  are  equal  whose  products, made  by  such  multiplication,  are  equal ;  for  if  a  power  can iraise  twice  the  weight  to  the  same  height,  or  the  same weight  to  twice  the  height,  in  the  same  time  that  another power  can,  the  first  power  is  double  the  second ;  and  if  a
Sower  can  raise  half  the  weight  to  double  the  height,  or ouble  the  weight  to  half  the  height  that  another  can,  those two  powers  are  equal.
''  But  note  that  aU  this  is  to  be  understood  in  case  of slow  or  equable  motion  of  the  body  raised ;  for  in  quick, accelerated,  or  retarded  motions,  tnei  m  inertia  of  the matter  moved  will  make  a  variation.
"  By  the.m  ineriuB  of  bodies  is  meant  the  force  required  to put  them  in  motion  when  they  are  in  a  state  of  rest,  or  to accelerate  them  suddenly ;  a  corresponding  force  must  be exerted  to  stop  or  check  a  heavy  body  when  it  is  in  motion.
"  In  comparing  the  effects  produced  by  water-wheels  with the  powers  producing  them — or,  in  other  words,  to  know what  part  ot  the  original  power  is  necessarily  lost  in  the application,  we  must  previously  know  how  much  of  th^ power  is  spent  in  overcoming  the  friction  of  the  machinery
I7KDEBSH0T  WATER-WHEELS.  87
aaid  the  resistaiice  of  the  air ;  also  what  is  the  real  velodty of  the  water  at  the  instant  that  it  strikes  the  wheel,  and the  real  quantity  of  water  expended  in  a  given  time.
"  !From  the  velocity  of  the  water,  at  the  instant  that  it strikes  the  wheel  being  given,  the  height  of  head  productive  of such  velocity  can  be  deduced,  from  acknowledged  and  experi- mented principles  of  hydrostatics ;  so  that  by  multiplying the  quantity  or  weight  of  water  reallj^  expended  m  a siven  time  bv  the  height  of  a  head  so  obtained,  which  must be  considerea  as  the  height  from  which  that  weight  of  water had  descended  in  that  given  time,  we  shall  have  a  product equal  to  the  original  power  of  the  water,  and  dear  of  all uncertainty  that  would  arise  from  the  friction  of  the  water, in  passing  small  apertures,  and  from  all  doubts,  arising  frxmi the  different  measures  of  spouting  waters,  assigned  by different  authors.  On  the  other  hand,  the  sum  of  the weights  raised  by  the  action  of  this  water,  and  of  the weight  required  to  overcome  the  friction  and  resistance of  the  machine,  multiplied  by  the  height  to  which  the  weight can  be  raised  in  the  tune  given,  the  product  will  be  equal  to the  effect  of  that  power ;  and  the  proportion  of  the  two products  will  be  the  proportion  of  the  power  to  the  effect : so  that  by  loading  the  wheel  with  different  weights successively,  we  shall  be  able  to  determine  at  what  parti- cular load  and  velocity  of  the  wheel  the  effect  is  a maximum."
The  nearer  the  effect  obtained  approaches  to  the  power expended  in  obtaining  it,  the  better  and  more  perfect  is  the machine.  Let  the  student  bear  in  mind  that  the  effect  can never  be  greater  than  the  cause.  This  is  too  often  forgotten, and  much  money  has  been  spent  and  time  wasted  in  con- triving machines  to  perform  impossibilities.
The  principles  of  mechanics  are  now  so  generally  well understood  that  perhaps  no  person  into  whose  hands  this book  may  fall,  will  ever  dream  of  inventing,  a  machine  which shall  give  a  result  equal  to  the  motive  power  and  overcome its  own  friction ;  yet  the  time  has  not  long  gone  by  when ingenious  persons,  reasoning  on  false  premises,  vainly  flat- tered themselves  that  they  might  accomplish  such  things and  devise  some  machine  which  should  continue  iaperpetual motion  without  a  maintaaiiing  power.
Mr.  Smeaton  goes  on  to  show  how  the  velocity  of  the water  striking  the  wheel  may  be  practically  ascertained: first,  by  naming  the  wheel  unloaded  in,  the  water,  and
68  UNDERSHOT  WATBR-WHEELS.
then  by  assisting  it  by  means  of  countep-weights  or cord,  wound  round  the  axle,  until  the  velocity  of  the wheel  is  identical  with  that  of  the  water  and  the  counter* weight,  equal  to  friction  and  resistance  of  the  air;  for, if  it  were  too  little,  the  water  would  accelerate  the  wheel beyond  the  weight;  and  if  too  great,  retard  it;  so  that the  water  becomes  a  regulator  of  the  wheel's  motion,  and the  velocity  of  its  circumference  becomes  a  measure  of the  velocity  of  the  water.  The  velocity  thus  determined, the  virtual  or  effective  head  may  be  determined  by  the  law of  gravitation ;  and  although,  as  Mr.  Smeaton  observed,  the virtual  head  bears  no  certain  or  definite  proportion  to  the actual  head — ^as  indeed  has  been  shown  in  a  foregoing  part of  this  book — ^yet,  when  the  aperture  is  greater,  or  the velocity  of  the  water  issuing  therefrom  is  less,  they  approach nearer  to  a  coincidence  ;  and  consequently^  in  large  openings of  mills  and  sluices,  where  great  quantities  of  water  are  dis- charged from  moderate  heads,  the  actual  head  of  water and  the  vertical  head,  determined  from  the  velocity,  will the  more  nearly  agree,  as  experience  confirms.
From  the  numerous  experiments  he  had  made  on  the undershot- wheel,  Mr.  Smeaton  deduced  the  following  rules, or,  as  he  calls  them,  maxims : —
.  "  1.  That  the  virtual,  or  effective  head,  being  the  same, the  effect  will  be  nearly  as  the  quantity  of  water  expended.
"  2.  That  the  expense  of  water  being  the  same,  the  effect will  be  nearly  as  the  height  of  the  virtual  or  effective head.
"  3.  That  the  quantity  of  water  emended  being  the same,  the  effect  is  nearly  as  the  square  of  its  velocity.
**4.  The  aperture  being  the  same,  the  effect  will  be nearly  as  the  cube  of  the  velocity  of  the  water."
Upon  comparmg  the  several  proportions  between  power and  effect,  remarked  during  the  course  of  his  experiments, Mr.  Smeaton  observes,  the  most  general  is  that  of  10  to  8, the  extremes  10  to  3*2  and  10  to  2*8 ;  but  as  it  appears, that  where  the  quantity  of  water,  or  the  velocity  thereof, that  is,  where  the  power  is  greatest,  the  second  term  of  the ratio  is  greatest  also,  we  may  therefore  well  allow  the proportion  subsisting  in  large  works  as  3  to  1.
He  also  observes,  that  the  proportions  of  velocity  between the  water  and  the  wheel  are  contained  in  the  limits  of  3  to  1 and  2  to  1 ;  but  as  the  greater  velocities  approach  the  limit
3   to  1,  and  the  greater  quantities  of  water  to  that  of
UNDEESHOT  WATBE- WHEELS.  69
2  to  1,  the  best  general  proportion  will  be  that  of  5  to  2* He  endeavoured  to  ascertain  what  is  the  ratio  between  the Iq^dsuch  a  wheel  would  carry  at  the  maximum  of  effect,  and, what  will  totallj  stop  it,  and  found  that  it  would  work steadily  until  that  proportion  was  as  4  to  3  ;  but  when  this limit  was  exceeded,  the  whole  worked  irregularly,  and  was liable  to  be  stopped.
The  principal  aim,  however,  of  a  good  millwright,  is  to make  the  wheel  work  to  the  greatest  advantage ;  and  the last-mentioned  experiments  were  therefore  more  curious than  useful ;  yet  they  are  highly  interesting,  as  they  make the  investigation  complete,  and  anticipate  a  question  which might  very  naturally  be  asked.
Mr.  Smeaton  mentions,  that  in  his  working  model  of  an undershot  water-wheel,  the  maximum  load  was  equal  to 91b.  6oz.,  and  that  the  wheel  ceased  moving  with  121b.  in the  scale ;  to  which,  if  the  weight  of  the  scale  is  added, nearly  lOoz.,  the  proportion  will  be  nearly  as  9  to  4, between  the  load  at  the  maximum  and  that  by  which  the wheel  is  stopped :  and  he  says, —
"  It  is  somewhat  remarkable,  that  though  the  velocity  of the  wheel,  in  relation  to  the  water,  turns  out  greater  than one-third  of  the  velocity  of  the  water,  yet  the  impulse  of the  water,  in  the  case  of  a  maximum,  is  more  than  double  of what  is  assigned  by  theory ;  that  is,  instead  of  four-ninths of  the  column,  it  is  nearly  equal  to  the  whole  column."
It  must  be  remembered,  that  in  the  present  case  the wheel  is  not  placed  in  an  open  river,  where  the  natural current,  after  it  has  communicated  its  impulse  to  the  float, has  room  on  all  sides  to  escape ;  but  in  a  conduit  or  race, to  which  the  float-board  being  adapted,  the  water  cannot otherwise  escape  than  by  moving  along  with  the  wheel ;  and when  a  wheel  works  in  this  manner,  as  soon  as  the  water strikes  the  float  it  receives  a  sudden  check,  and  rises  up against  the  float,  like  a  wave  against  a  fixed  object ;  so  that in  the  working  model,  when  the  sheet  of  water  was  not  a quarter  of  an  inch  thick  before  it  met  the  float,  yet  this sheet  acted  against  the  whole  surface  of  a  float  three  inches high ;  and,  consequently,  if  the  float  were  no  higher  than the  thickness  of  the  sheet  of  water,  a  great  p^  of  the force  would  be  lost  by  the  water  daslung  over  the  float.
Although  in  this  country  the  value  of  water  power,  and the  necessity  to  make  the  most  of  it,  has  gradually  caused the  undershot  wheel  to  be  abandoned,  and  the  breast  wheel
70
AMERICAN   SAW  MILL.
to  take  its  place,  whereon  the  gravity  or  weight  of  the water  acts  insteaid  of  its  impulse;  yet  there  are  maiiy purposes  to  which  the  undershot  wheel  may  be  applied  with
Ambsican  Saw  Mill.
advantage,  and  to  none  more  than  the  sawing  of  timber, especially  in  new  settlements,  and  in  those  localities  where water  power  is  abundant  and  mechanical  skill  is  scarce, where  labour  is  expensive  and  timber  costs  nothing.    In
X7KDEBSH0T  WATEB-WHSELS.  71
Buch  circumstances,  a  simple  and  efficient  saw-mill  is  of  great advantaffe,  and  it  may  be  worked  at  once  &om  the  aade  of the  undershot  water-wheel,  working  two  saw  frames,  by means  of  cranked  arms  upon  the  ends  of  it ;  or,  if  the  axle be  made  of  iron,  a  crank  may  be  formed  in  it  to  work  a single  saw  frame,  as  shown  in  the  annexed  woodcut, reduced  from  an  engraving  in  the  Professional  Papers  of  the Eoyal  Engineers,  vol.  vi.,  in  which  will  also  be  found  a minute  description,  elaborately  illustrated,  of  the  saw  mills and  machinery  for  raising  timber  in  Chatham  dockyard, erected  by  the  late  Sir  Mark  Isambard  Brunei.    (See  fig.  26.)
In  this  engraving  a  is  the  dam,  frequently  formed  of square  logs,  resting  against  a  standard  secured  by  struts, provision  being  made  to  caary  off  the  surplus  water.  B  is the  sluice,  which,  being  raised  to  work  tne  wheel,  admits the  water  into  the  trough  o ;  here  it  strikes  the  float-boards of  the  wheel  n,  which  is  generally  made  of  ijmall  diameter, so  that  the  velocity  of  the  water  may  cause  it  to  make  as many  revolutions  as  possible,  consistent  with  the  requisite power ;  the  saws  making  as  many  strokes  as  the  wheel  makes revolutions.  E,  the  crank  on  the  wheel  shaft,  to  which  is adapted  the  connectiag  rod  f,  which  is  attached  to  the bottom  of  the  saw-frame  a.  This  sHdes  up  and  down between  the  standards  with  an  alternating  motion,  the strokes  being  double  the  length  of  the  crank  arm.  e  is  the log  to  be  cut ;  it  is  mounted  on  the  frame  l,  which  has  a rack  fixed  in  its  under  surface,  and  is  supported  by  the rollers  a  a.
The  pinion  h  on  the  axis  of  the  wheel  M  works  in  the rack,  and  according  as  the  wheel  moves  forward  or  backward, it  works  the  frame,  moving  it  towards  or  away  from  the saws.  Motion  is  given  to  this  wheel  by  the  pall  c,  the other  end  of  which  is  jointed  to  one  of  the  sides of  the  arm  of  the  bent  lever  d.  This  lever  is  moved backward  and  forward  by  the  rod  e  which  is  jointed  to  the bent  rod  f,  and  this  rod,  or  rather  lever,  is  fitted  upon an  axle  attached  at  one  end  to  the  frame  of  the  wooden building  and  at  the  other  to  the  frame  of  the  saw-mill. When  it  is  requisite  to  reverse  the  motion,  after  the  log  is cut,  the  paU  e  is  lifted  clear  of  teeth  of  the  ratchet-wheel 1£;  and  this  wheel  is  turned  in  an  opposite  direction  by himd.
A  saw-mill  on  this  principle  was  made  by  the  late Mr.  Bennie,  of  which  he   has  given  the  following  brief
73  UNDBBSHOT  WATER- WHEELS.
description :  it  appears  to  have  been  driven  by  the  water  of Leith.  The  diameter  of  the  wheel  was  4  feet  6  inches,  and its  width  3  feet  2  inches.  The  floats  were  12  inches  deep, and  were  inclined  in  direction  4  inches  past  the  centre.
The  cranks  had  11  inches  radius ;  there  was  one  on  each end  of  the  water-wheel  axle ;  consequently  the  saw-frames driven  by  them  had  22  inches  stroke.  The  one  frame  had five  saws  and  the  other  frame  two  saws ;  they  made  13*6 strokes  to  cut  one  inch  forward.
The  &11  of  water  was  3  feet  7  inches,  and  it  was  conducted in  a  sloping  direction,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  be  nearly  a tangent  to  it ;  the  perpendicular  height  of  all  being  3  feet 7  inches,  and  the  horizontal  distance  8  feet.
The  sluice  was  3  feet  2  inches  wide,  and  was  raised  to  the surface  of  the  water,  namely  18  inches,  at  the  head  of  the slope  where  it  was  placed.  The  sluice  being  raised  tp the  water's  surCace,  the  wheel  made  fifty-eight  turns  per minute,  working  the  seven  saws.  The  timber  cut  was Norway  fir ;  in  the  frame  with  five  saws  it  was  8^  inches deep,  and  in  the  frame  with  two  saws  it  was  6  inches  deep, so  tnat  in  one  minute  it  cut  4*26  inches  forward.  It  is  to be  observed,  however,  that  in  such  small  wheels  there  is  a considerable  loss  of  effect,  when  compared  with  wheels  of larger  diameter ;  and  accordingly  Mr.  Bennie  states  the performance  of  another  saw-miU,  at  Dartford,  which,  with the  dimensions,  he  tabulates  as  follows : —
DABTFOBD    SAW   MILL.
1.  Water-wheel  16  feet  diameter.
2.  Breadth  4  feet  6  inches,  depth  1  foot  3  inches.
3.  Fall  2  feet  3  inches,  head  2  feet  9  inches.
4.  Spur-wheel,  or  inner  end  of  shaft,  64  cogs.
6.  Pmion  on  crank  18  cogs ;  thus  the  crsmk  made  3*55 turns  for  one  turn  of  the  water-wheel.
6.  Throw  of  crank  10  inches.
7.  Slabbing-saw  made  34  strokes  for  4  inches  advance  of timber.
8.  Deal-saw  made  19  strokes  to  1  inch  advance.
9.  Frame  of  saws  4  feet  wide  inside ;  saws  5  feet  3  inches long.
10.  Batchet-wheel  6  feet  diameter.
11.  Teeth  of  saws  i  of  an  inch  asunder.
12.  Space  taken  out  by  saw  i  of  an  inch.
UN&EBSUOT  WATBB- WHEELS.  73
EXPEEIMBWT.
1.  Quantity  of  water,  by  floating  wax  balls,  2461  cubic feet  per  minute.
2.  Quantity,  by  measuring  at  the  tail  of  the  wheel,  3297 cubic  feet,  medium  2879.
But  as  the  water  was  gathering  in  the  pool,  and  as  the river  was  extremely  dirty,  it  is  likely  that  the  principal  error may  be  in  first  experiments;  and  therefore,  instead  of taking  the  medium  quantity,  we  shall  call  it  3000  cubic feet.
Sixteen  saws  at  work  in  two  frames,  namely,  two  slabbing and  fourteen  deal  saws ;  the  water-wheel  made  twelve  turns per  minute.  Thirty-four  saws  being  put  on,  the  wheel  made only  eight  turns  per  minute.
CALCULATIOl^S.
The  diameter  of  water-wheel  being  16  feet,  its  circum- ference is  3-1416  X  16  =  60-2656 ;  thia  multiplied  by  twelve rerolutions  =  603*18  feet  per  minute,  or  1005  feet  per second.
The  head  of  water  being  2  feet  9  inches,  the  velocity  due from  this  is  133 ;  thus  the  velocity  of  the  head  of  water  is to  that  of  the  wheel  as  13-3  to  1005,  or  as  5  to  3-778 ; hence  the  effect  produced  will  be  nearly  equal  to  twelve horses.
The  reader  will  notice  that  the  saws  in  the  present instance  are  driven,  not  from  the  axle  of  the  water-wheel, but  from  a  second  motion.  The  wheel  is  of  larger  diameter, and  makes  a  less  number  of  revolutions ;  for  the  requisite speed  could  not  have  been  obtained  from  so  low  a  head  of water,  and  it  is  therefore  gained  by  driving  the  pinion  upon the  second  shaft,  wHch  works  the  saws,  by  the  toothed  wheel of  greater  size  upon  the  water-wheel  axle.  The  speed  given to  this  wheel  is  somewhat  greater  than  Mr.  Smeaton  advises, but  this  is  done  to  render  it  more  readily  applicable  to  the saws,  and  the  fall  from  the  wheel  clears  it  of  back  water.
The  public  are  much  indebted  to  Mr.  Q-eorge  Eennie  for the  very  liberal  manner  in  which  he  has  given  them  these and  other  results  of  his  father's  experience,  which  will  be found  in  the  "  Quarterly  Papers  on  Engineering."
It  is  curious  to  remark,  that  the  boards  of  uie  undershot wheel  still  bear  the  name  of  floats^  although  they  are  no longer  turned  by  the  current  of  the  river.      While  the
u
UNDBESHOT  WATER-WHEELS.
cavities  or  receptacles  for  the  water  on  the  face  of  the overshot  wheel  are  called  buckets,  although  they  bear  no resemblance  to  a  bucket,  otherwise  than  by  holding  water.  In these  names  we  trace  their  origin  from  the  ancient  irrigating- wheel,  turned  by  floats  in  the  stream,  and  lifting  the  water in  wooden  buckets  or  earthen  pitchers  fisistened  upon  the rim  of  the  "wheel.
A  very  simple  and  neat  method  of  employing  the  im-
nlsive  force  of  water,  when  a  small  stream  descends m  a  great  height,  is  shown  by  a  working  model  in the  Museum  of  Practical  Geology.  A  jet  of  water  issuing from  a  pipe  is  made  to  strike  the  vanes  of  a  small  wheel, inclosed  m  case,  and  causes  it  to  revolve  rapidly.  The wheel  may  be  stopped,  or  its  motion  reversed,  by  turning  a stop-cock  or  cylinder.  The  whole  machine  may  be  made  of brass,  or  other  metal,  in  a  very  compact  form ;  and  in  a  hilly country  might  be  usefully  employed  at  a  farm  in  turning agricultural  machines,  to  save  manual  labour.  Its  small size  and  cost  make  it  well  suited  for  such  purposes  (See woodcut).  The  model  at  the  Museum  in  Jermyn-street  is adapted  to  machinery  for  winding  up  ore  from  a  mine.
Fig.  27.
OVERSHOT  WHEELS.  75
CHAPTER  IX.
OVEBSHOT  WHEELS,   GRAVITY  OP  WATER  EMPLOYED  INSTEAD OF  IMPULSE.
It  was  not  difficult  to  imagine  tliat  if  a  small  stream  of water  descending  from  a  hill  side  were  directed  into  the mouths  of  the  earthen  vessels  or  wooden  buckets  of  the wheels  used  for  irrigation,  the  vessels  so  loaded  would  de- scend and  the  wheels  revolve,  so  that  rotary  motion  and mechanical  power  would  be  gained ;  the  buckets  empi^ing themselves  at  the  lowest  point,  as  they  had  before  been emptied  at  the  highest ;  the  wheel  turning  in  the  opposite direction,  because  the  weight,  or  gravity  of  the  water  was now  the  moving  power  of  this  overshot  wheel.
In  the  undershot  wheel  the  impidse  of  the  water  striking the  floats  drives  the  wheel;  in  the  overshot  wheel  the weight  of  the  water  flowing  into  the  buckets  turns  the wheel,  and  all  impulse  must  be  avoided ;  the  water  must flow  with  the  same  velocity  as  the  wheel,  or  just  so  much  in excess  as  will  prevent  the  buckets  from  striking  the  water as  they  present  themselves  to  be  filled.  Experience  soon showed  tnat  the  earthen  jar  or  the  suspended  bucket  were cumbrouii  and  inconvenient,  and  as  larger  and  more  powerful wheels  were  applied  to  more  copious  streams,  a  series  of  simple wooden  troughs  formed  across  the  face  of  the  wheel  were found  to  answer  the  purpose  better.  When  the  supply  of water  was  ample  and  the  wheel  large,  it  was  found  that  to fill  these  troughs  well  and  regularly  the  stream  should  be made  nearly  as  broad  as  the  wheel,  and  shallow  in  proportion to  its  width.  The  wheel  was  then  formed  by  placing  two sets  of  (vrms,  at  a  sufficient  distance  apart,  upon  the  aale^ and  fixing  to  their  ends  segments  of  wood  to  form  the  circle ; upon  these  segments  across  ike  face  of  the  wheel,  and  equal to,  or  some\^t  exceeding  in  length  the  width  of  the stream  or  sheet  of  water,  were  nailed  the  sole-hoards;  on the  end  of  these  boards,  and  at  ri^ht  angles  to  them,  so as  to  form  a  projecting  rim  or  ledge  on  each  side  of  the wheeFs  face,  wach  fixed  the  shrouding^  formed  of  stout  plank
s  2
76  OTBSBSHOT  WHEELS.
generally  from  12  to  18  inches  broad ;  and  between  these shroudings,  across  the  face  of  the  wheel,  were  placed  the buckets,  made  of  lighter  planking,  and  having  their  ends  let into  the  shrouding,  by  which  the  ends  were  closed.  The edge  of  the  bucket-board  meeting  the  sole-plank  formed two  sides  of  a  triangular  trough,  the  third  being  open  to receive  and  discharge  the  water.  Subsequently  the  bucket was  made  in  two  boards,  one  called  the  frontj  and  the  other the  bottom  of  the  bucket,  the  latter  taking  off  the  angle  and making  the  section  of  the  bucket,  or  form  of  the  trough, that  of  a  trapezium,  which  form  it  long  retained,  until  the buckets-of-water  wheels  were  made  of  iron  plate.
Since  water-wheels  have  been  made  wholly  of  iron,  and chiefly  of  wrought  iron,  the  form  of  the  bucket  has  been either  a  part  of  a  circle,  a  cycloid,  an  epicycloid,  or  an Archimedean  spiral,  and  of  these  last-named  forms  especially in  breast-wheels,  which  will  hereafter  be  noticed.  Great pains  are  now  taken  by  the  best  makers  of  water-wheels to  form  and  adapt  the  curve  of  the  buckets  so  that  they  may readily  fill  with  water,  retain  their  load  as  long  as  possible, and  discharge  it  wiih  facility  when  it  has  ceased  to  be useful.
Mr.  Smeaton's  paper  on  undershot  wheeb,  before  quoted, was  followed  by  another  on  overshot  wheels,  read  before  the Boyal  Society,  May  24,  1759.  These  papers  were  long considered  as  the  text  from  which  millwrights  should  deduce their  rules  of  practice,  and  even  now  they  well  deserve  the xMureM  study  of  those  who  engage  in  the  construction  of such  machines,  together  with  the  later  experiments  of  Eennie, Morin,  and  Poncelet.
Mr.  Smeaton  had  the  merit  of  proving  and  demonstrating the  advantage  and  the  difference  of  effect  resulting  from employing  the  weight  instead  of  the  impulse  of  a  volume  of water  descending  &om  a  given  height.
"  In  reasoning  without  experiment,  one  might  be  led  to imagine  that,  however  different  the  mode  of  application  is, yet  that  wherever  the  same  quantity  of  water  descends through  the  same  perpendicular  space  the  natural  effective power  would  be  equal ;  supposing  the  machinery  firee  from friction,  equally  calculated  to  receive  the  full  effect  of the  power,  and  to  make  the  most  of  it :  for  if  we  suppose the  height  of  a  column  of  water  to  be  30  inches  and  resting upon  a  base  or  aperture  of  one  inch  square,  every  cubic  inch of  water  that  departs  therefrom  will   acquire  the  same
OYERSHOT  WHBSLS.  77
Telocil^  or  mamenium,  from  the  imiform  pressure  of  30  inches above  it,  that  one  cubic  inch  let  ML  from  the  top  will  ac- quire in  falling  down  to  the  level  of  the  aperture;  one would  therefore  suppose  that  a  cubic  inch  of  water  let  fall through  a  space  of  30  inches,  and  then  impinging  upon another  bodj,  would  be  capable  of  producing  an  equu  effect bj  colUfiion,  as  if  the  same  cubic  indi  had  descended  through the  same  space  with  a  slower  motion,  and  produced  its effects  gradually :  for  in  both  cases  gravity  acts  upon  an equal  qi^uxtity  of  matter,  through  an  equal  space ;  and  con- sequently, that  whatever  was  the  ratio,  between  power  and effect  in  undershot-wheels,  the  same  would  obtam  in  over- shot, and  indeed  in  all  others ;  yet,  however  conclusive  this reasoning  ma,j  seem,  it  appears,  upon  trial,  that  the  effect  of the  gravity  of  descendiug  bodies  is  very  different  from  the effect  of  the  stroke  of  such  as  are  non-elastic,  though  gene- rated  by  an  equal  mechanical  power/'
Gravity,  it  is  true,  acts  for  a  longer  space  of  time  upon the  body  that  descends  slowly,  than  upon  one  that  falls quickly :  but  this  cannot  occasion  the  difference  in  the  effect ; for  an  elastic  body  falling  through  the  same  space  in  the same  time  will,  by  collision  upon  another  elaatic  body, rebound  nearly  to  the  height  from  which  it  fell:  or,  by communicating  its  motion,  cause  an  equal  one  to  ascend  to the  same  height.
The  observations  and  deductions  which  Mr.  Smeaton made  from  his  experiments  were  as  follows —
MrsL — ^As  concerning  the  ratio  between  the  power  and effect  of  Overshot-wheels.
"  The  effective  power  of  water  must  be  reckoned  upon the  whole  descent ;  because  it  must  be  raised  to  that  height, in  order  to  be  in  a  condition  of  producing  the  same  effect  a second  time.
The  ratio  between  the  powers  so  estimated,  and  the  effect at  the  maximum  as  deduced  from  the  several  sets  of  experi- ments, is  shown  to  range  from  10  to  7*6  to  that  of  10  to 5*2; that  is,  nearly  from  4  to  3  and  from  4  to  2.  In  these experiments,  where  the  heads  of  water  and  quantities  ex- pended are  least,  the  proportion  is  nearly  as  4  to  3 ;  but where  the  heads  and  quantities  are  greatest,  it  approaches nearer  to  that  of  4  to  2,  and  by  a  medium  of  the  wnole  the ]:atio  is  that  of  3  to  2  nearly.  We  have  seen  before,  in  our observations  upon  the  effects  of  undershot-wheels,  that  the general  ratio  of  the  power  to  the  effect  when  greatest  was
78  OVBHSHOT  WHEELS.
3  tp  1 ;  the  effect,  therefore,  of  overshot  wheels j  under  the same  circumstances  of  quantity  and  fall,  is,  at  a  medium, double  to  that  of  the  undershot.
Second, — ^As  to  the  proper  height  of  the  wheel  in  pro^ portion  to  the  whole  descent : —
It  has  been  observed,  that  the  effect  of  the  same  quantity  of water  descending  through  the  same  space  is  double,  when acting  by  its  gravity  upon  an  overshot-wheel,  to  what  the same  produces  when  acting  by  its  impulse  upon  an  under* shot.  Therefore  the  whole  height  at  the  fall  should  "be  made available,  because,  when  the  water  is  laid  upon  the  top  of  the wheel,  it  is  upon  the  gravity,  and  not  the  impulse,  that  thd effect  depends.  A  sv&cient  fall,  however,  must  be  given  to Iwr  on  the  water  with  a  velocity  somewhat  greater  than  that of  the  circumference  of  the  wheel,  otherwise  the  wheel  will not  only  be  retarded  by  the  buckets  striking  the  water,  but a  part  of  it  will  be  dashed  over  and  lost,  while  the  buckets wOl  not  be  so  well  filled ;  but  no  greater  velocity  should  be given  than  \s  sufficient  to  accomplish  these  objects,  as  it would  be  power  wasted.
Third. — ^As  to  the  best  velocity  of  the  wheel's  circum- ference in  order  to  produce  the  greatest  effect : —
If  a  heavy  body  fall  fairly  from  the  surface  of  the  head  to the  bottom  of  the  descent,  it  will  take  a  certain  time  in falling,  but  during  the  fall  no  mechanical  effect  is  produced ; for  in  this  case  the  whole  action  of  gravity  is  spent  in giving  the  body  a  certain  velocity;  but  if  this  body  in falling  be  made  to  act  upon  somethmg  else,  so  as  to  produce a  mechanical  effect,  the  falling  body  will  be  retarded,  be** cause  a  part  of  the  action  of  gravity  is  then  spent  in produciQg  the  effect,  and  the  remainder  onlv  in  giving motion  to  the  falling  body ;  and  therefore  the  slower  a  body descends,  the  greater  will  be  the  action  of  gravity  applicable to  produce  a  mechanical  effect.
If  an  overshot-wheel  had  no  friction,  or  other  resistance, the  greatest  velocity  it  could  attain  would  be  half  a  revo* lution  in  the  same  time  that  a  heavy  body  laid  upon  the top  of  it  would  take  to  fall  through  its  diameter,  but  no mechanical  effect  could  be  derived  from  the  wheel.
It  is  an  advantage  in  practice  that  the  velocity  of  the wheel  should  not  be  diminished  farther  than  what  will  pro- cure some  adequate  benefit  in  point  of  power,  because, as  the  motion  becomes  slower,  the  buckets  must  be  made larger,  and  the  wheel  being  loaded  with  water,  the  stress
QVEBSHOT  WHEELS.
79
upon  every  part  of  the  work  will  be  increased  in  proportion. Mr.  Smeaton's  experiments  showed  that  the  best  effect  was obtained  when  the  velocity  of  the  wheel's  circumference  was a  little  more  than  three  feet,  or  a  second ;  and  hence,  it
Fig.  28.
became  a  general  rule  to  make  the  speed  of  the  overshot water  wheels  at  their  circumference  3i  feet  per  second,  or 210  feet  per  minute. Experience  showed  this  velocity  to  be  applicable  to  the
80  OVBESHOT  WHEELS.
highest  water-wheels  as  well  as  the  lowest,  and  if  all  other p»rts  of  the  work  be  properly  adapted  thereto,  it  will  pro- duce very  nearly  the  greatest  effect  possible ;  but  it  has  also been  practically  shown,  that  the  velocity  of  high  wheels  may be  increased  beyond  this  rate  without  appreciable  loss,  as the  height  of  the  fall  and  the  diameter  of  the  wheel  increase, and  that  a  wheel  of  24  feet  high  may  move  at  the  rate  of 6  feet  per  second  without  any  considerable  loss  of  power.
The  author  has  constructed  several  overshot  water-wheels of  iron  30  feet  diameter  and  upwards  ;  and  for  these  he  has adopted  a  speed  of  6  feet  per  second  with  great  advantage.
The  circumference  of  a  30  feet  wheel  is  92.24  feet,  and  if it  move  at  the  rate  of  3^  feet  per  second,  or  210  per  minute, it  makes  only  2*275  revolutions,  but  if  it  go  at  the  rate  of 6  feet,  it  makes  very  nearly  four  revolutions  per  minute. The  greater  speed  is  advantageous,  also,  because  it  requires less  gear-work  to  bring  it  up  to  the  required  rate  for  driving machinery;  and  because  the  load  upon  the  water-wheel and  its  axle  are  reduced  nearly  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the speeds.
After  making  the  requisite  allowances,  it  will  be  found that  a  fall  of  7  inches  will  bring  the  water  upon  the  wheel with  a  speed  of  3^  feet  full,  and  that  a  fall  of  18i  inches will  give  a  velocity  to  the  stream  of  fiill  6  feet  per  second ; and,  consequently,  that  the  increase  of  speed  and  the  reduc- tion of  load  upon  the  wheel,  as  before  stated,  are  gained  at the  expense  of  one  foot  of  fall,  making  a  difference  of  effect between  a  wheel  of  31  feet  diameter,  at  the  slower  speed, and  a  wheel  of  30  feet  diameter  at  the  greater,  in  the  ratio of  44*6  to  430 ;  but  the  steadiness  and  regularity  of  motion derived  from  the  momentum  of  the  quicker  wheel  render this  difference  practically  inappreciable  as  compared  with the  gain.  By  the  foregoing  comparison  it  will  be  seen  how far  the  rule  laid  down  by  M.  Smeaton  may  in  practice  be departed  from  as  the  diameter  of  the  wheel  mcreases.
The  diameter,  however,  has  its  limits,  and  a  water-wheel of  great  height  is  costly,  cumbrous,  and  slow.  A  wheel  was erected  in  South  Wales  by  Messrs.  Crawshay,  at  the Cyferthfa  Iron  Works,  near  Merthyr  Tydvil,  50  feet  in diameter  and  6  feet  wide:  it  had  156  buckets,  and made  2^  revolutions  per  minute.  This  wheel,  erected  in the  year  1800,  was  used  to  blow  the  furnaces.  It  was for  some  time  the  largest  and  most  powerfiil  water-wheel  in use ;  but  it  has  since  been  considerably  surpassed.   Mr.  John
OVfiASflOT  WHEELS.  81
Taylor  applied  a  fall  of  water  in  the  mining  district,  n*^^ Tavistock,  526  feet  in  height,  to  give  motion,  to  seventeen water-wheels ;  eight  of  them  employed  in  pumping  water from  a  depth  of  nearly  200  fathoms.  The  diameter  of  the largest  of  these  wheels  being  51  feet,  with  a  width  of  10  feet in  the  clear  across  the  face ;  the  smallest  of  the  eight  wheels being  32  feet  in  diameter,  and  the  others  of  intermediate size.  Pour  other  wheels  give  motion  to  machinery  for drawing  up  the  ores  to  the  surface ;  and  the  remaining  five are  employed  to  drive  mills  for  crushing  and  stamping the  ores.
The  performance  of  the  largest  wheel  was  as  foUows : diameter,  51  feet ;  breadth,  within  the  shrouding,  10  feet ; the  water  poured  into  its  buckets  was  at  the  rate  of  5632 gallons  per  minute,  which,  at  101b.  per  gallon,  would be  56,3201b.  weight  descending  51  feet  =  2,872,3201b. descending  1  foot.  That  is  the  power  expended;  which, being  divided  by  33,000  for  a  horse's  power,  according  to Mr.  Watt,  gives  87*0  horse-power  expended.
The  wheel,  when  so  supplied,  made  5  revolutions  per minute,  and  worked  6  pumps  of  the  diameters  and  depths annexed.  The  length  of  stroke  on  all  the  pumps  was  6  leet, and  the  effective  stroke  or  motion  in  the  pumps  to  raise water  was  at  the  rate  of  30  feet  per  minute.
Lifts.        Fathoms.  Feet.  Diameter.  Weight,  lb.
1  43  ...  1|  IZjfUL  16,136
3  112  ...  ^  13    „  38,922
1  25  ...  3  14    „  10,226
1  6  ...  6                   9    „  1,132
66,415
The  weight  of  the  columns  of  water  in  all  the  six  pumps amounting  to  66,415  lb.,  being  raised  30  feet  per  minute, is  equal  to  1,992,450  lb.  per  minute  raised  1  foot ;  that  is the  power  actually  exerted  in  raising  the  water,  which,  being divided  by  33,000,  gives  60*36  horse-power  realised.
The  useful  effect,  or  work  done,  being  at  the  rate  of  69*4 per  cent,  of  the  power  expended,  the  remaining  30*6  per cent,  being  lost,  partly  by  friction  of  the  pump-work  and resistance  to  the  motion  of  the  water  through  the  pump, and  by  other  retarding  causes  ;  this,  however,  is  good  duty for  such  a  wheel  so  applied.
A  wheel  larger  in  diameter,  but  not  so  powerM,  has  been made  by  Messrs.  Donkin  &  Co.,  of  London,  namely  76ifeet
E  8
SZ  OVERSHOT  WHEELS.
The  width  of  £su^  is  2  feet,  the  number  of  buckets  160,  and the  power  stated  to  be  30  horses.  It  is  slV  of  iron,  and principally  of  wrought  iron.  It  was  sent  to  Italy,  where  it has  been  erected  and  set  to  work,  but  the  useful  effect  has not  been  ascertained.
Attempts  have  been  made  to  employ  a  high  fall  of  water by  placing  one  wheel  above  another ;  this  was  tried  many years  ago  at  Aberdare,  in  South  Wales,  where  two  wheels, each  40  feet  in  diameter,  were  so  placed,  like  the  figure  of  8, and  were  connected  by  teeth  on  their  respective  rims — the lower  wheel  receiving  the  water  after  it  lelt  the  upper  one, and  revolving  in  the  opposite  or  reverse  way.  The  result was  not  satis^Eictory ;  but  ia  another  case,  a  drawing  of which  lies  before  the  writer,  wherein  Messrs.  Charles  Wood and  Brothers,  of  Macclesfield,  had  two  overshot  water- wheels  each  of  26  feet  ia  diameter,  and  6  feet  wide,  placed over  each  other,  they  succeeded  by  a  somewhat  different arrangement  of  the  toothed-wheel  works.  The  two  wheels were  not  connected  immediately  with  each  other,  but  by means  of  pinionsy  which  worked  into  teeth  upon  the  rims  of the  two  water-wheels,  causing  them  both  to  revolve  in  the 9cme  direction,  so  that  the  water,  on  leaving  the  buckets  of the  upper  wheel,  was  more  easily  and  readily  received  by  the buckets  of  the  lower  wheel.
In  either  of  these  cases,  however,  the  employment  of  the turbine,  or  the  pressure  engine,  which  will  be  described  here- after, would  have  been  much  less  costly  and  more  effective. The  like  may  be  said  of  all  the  contrivances  to  substitute endless  chains  with  buckets  applied  to  high  falls  instead  of water-wheels.  When  the  waterfall  is  too  high  for  a  wheel to  be  used  conveniently,  the  turbine  or  the  pressure  engine should  be  resorted  to,  according  to  the  kind  of  work  required to  be  done  by  the  machinery.
Where  the  quantity  of  water  is  large  and  variable,  and the  fall  such  as  may  be  termed  an  intermediate  height,  but varying  also  with  tne  supply,  it  is  found  advantageous  not to  lay  the  water  upon  the  top  of  the  wheel,  so  that  it  may work  overshot,  but  to  make  the  diameter  of  the  wheel greater  than  the  mean  height  of  the  fall,  and  to  lay  the water,  as  it  were,  "  on  the  shoulder "  of  the  wheel,  or  at 45  degrees  from  the  perpendicular,  that  is,  half-way  between the  horizontal  line  and  the  perpendicular,  or,  as  millwrights say,  "  at  nine  o'clock."  Very  little  mechanical  effect  is produced  in  the  upper  eighth  of  the  circle  as  compared  with
OVERSHOT  WHEELS.  8S
the  next  quarter^  on  which  the  descent  of  the  water  is  nearlj perpendicular,  and.  when  the  wheel  is  fitted  with  toothed segments  at  or  near  its  circumference,  acting  on  a  pinion placed  on  a  level  with  the  axle,  the  weight  of  the  water  is Drought  to  bear  at  once  upon  the  pinion  te^th,  the  stress  is taken  off  the. arms  of  the  wheel,  and  the  axle  becomes,  as  it were,  merely  a  pivot  on  which  the  wheel  turns.  By  this arrangement,  the  late  Messrs.  Hughes  and  Wren,  of  Man- chester, were  enabled  to  make  the  arms  of  their  wheels  of simple  tension  rods  of  bar-iron,  by  which  the  rim  of  the wheel  was  tied  and  braced  to  the  centre,  a  plan  which,  with some  modifications  and  improvements,  is  still  in  use,  and sometimes  the  segments  have  interior  teeth,  which  renders the  wheel-work  more  compact.
In  the  best  constructed  wheels,  the  water  is  laid  on  in  a thin  sheet  of  no  greater  depth  than  will  give  it  a  somewhat greater  velocity  than  that  of  the  wheel,  the  difierence  being just  sufficient  to  pour  into  the  succeeding  buckets  the  proper supply  of  water.  The  buckets  should  be  so  capacious  that they  need  not  be  full  when  the  wheel  carries  its  maximum load,  in  order  that  no  water  may  be  wasted,  and  that  they mav  retain  the  water  in  them  to  the  last  moment  that  its weight  on  the  wheel  is  effective,  and  yet  empty  themselves as  soon  as  it  ceases  to  be  so.  It  is  also  expement  in  prac^ tice  to  make  the  sheet  of  water  not  so  broad  as  the  wheels : if  the  wheel  be  broad  on  the  face,  the  stream  may  be  2  inches at  each  end  short  of  the  length  of  the  buckets;  the  air escaping  at  the  ends  then  blows  out  no  water  with  it ;  and all  these  precautions,  though  small  in  themselves,  tend  to produce  smoothness,  regularity,  and  increased  effect  in  the working  of  the  machinery.
There  is,  however,  one  mode  of  using  water-power — acting by  its  gravity — in 'buckets  upon  a  chain,  much  used  in  South W  ales,  which  is  found  very  useful  for  raising  ore  from  the pits.  An  endless  chain  is  passed  over  a  wheel  of  16  feet  in diameter  placed  between  two  pits.  The  chain  passing  down each  pit,  and  through  an  openmg  at  the  bottom  between  the two  :  two  large  buckets,  or  rather  shallow  tubs,  of  wrought iron,  are  fixed  upon  the  chain,  so  that  the  suspension  is  by the  centre  of  the  tubs,  and  they  are  so  placed  that  when  one tub  is  at  the  top  of  its  pit,  the  other  is  at  the  bottom  of  its pit.  Each  tub  or  bucket  is  covered  by  a  strong  platform, which  fills  and  closes  the  pit's  mouth  when  hoisted  up,  and carries  the  small  wagon  or  tram  containing  the  ore  upon
84  OVERSHOT  WHEELS.
it ;  and  each  is  also  fitted  mth  a  valve  at  bottom  to  discharge the  water.  A  branched  pipe,  communicating  with  an  elevated reservoir,  is  laid  to  the  pits*  mouths,  and  fitted  with  stop- cocks or  valves.  The  tub  at  the  pit's  mouth  being  filled with  water,  over-balances  the  empty  tub  at  bottom,  and raises  it,  with  its  tram  load  of  ore  to  the  top.  When  the full  bucket  has  descended  the  pit,  the  valve  is  opened  and the  water  discharged ;  the  other  being  filled  in  like  manner, descends,  and  thus  alternately  each  raises  the  other  with  its load  of  ore.  The  water  finds  its  way  out  of  the  mine  by  a drift  or  adit  into  the  valley;  the  long  loop  or  bight  of slack  chain  below  the  buckets,  and  hanging  to  the  centre  of each,  equalises  the  weight  of  chain  at  aU  times ;  and  a  bmke applied  to  the  large  wheel  regulates  the  speed  of  the  de- scending bucket.  In  some  pl^es,  the  two  buckets  work  in one  pit  of  an  oblong  form ;  the  diameter  of  the  wheel  is reduced  to  7  feet;  it  is  fitted  with  toothed  segments, working  into  a  pinion,  fixed  upon  a  second  axle,  on  which the  brake-wheel  is  placed,  in  order  to  gain  the  requisite power  to  control  the  descending  weight.  Drawings  of  both these  plans  lie  before  the  writer,  but  the  principle  and  con- struction are  so  simple  that  description  will  probably  suffice. It  may  be  proper  to  mention  that  the  buckets  generally work  in  guides,  that  the  discharging  valves  are  opened  by striking  upon  a  point  or  projecting  spike  at  the  bottom  of the  pit,  and  that  upon  the  platforms  which  cover  the  buckets there  is  a  portion  of  the  rail  or  tramway  laid  to  match  with the  lines  of  way  at  the  top  and  bottom  of  the  pit,  ^o  that the  tram  or  carriage  may  run  &om  the  platform  to  its destination.
BB3BAST  WHEELS.  85
CHAPTEE  X,
BBEAST  WHEELS,  M.  PONGELET'S  WHEEL.    LARGE  8TBEAMS AND  LOW  FALLS.
At  the  time  when  Mr.  Smeaton  wrote  the  papers  on undershot  and  overshot  water-wheels,  before  referred  to,  the BBEAST- WHEEL  was  but  little  known,  and  imperfectly  under- stood ;  for  it  seems  then  to  have  been  a  kind  of  compromise between  the  two,  in  which  it  was  attempted  to  combine  the action  of  impulse  and  gravity.  It  had  become  evident  that the  impulse  of  a  column  of  water  did  not  produce  the  same effect  as  its  weight ;  and  the  experiments  of  Mr.  Smeaton showed  what  the  difference  was.  Having  investigated  the other  two  modes  of  applying  water  power,  he  contents  him- self with  saying,  "  We  might  naturally  proceed  to  examine the  effect  where  the  impulse  and  weight  are  combined,  as  in the  several  kinds  of  breast-wheels,  &c. ;  but  the  application of  the  same  principles  on  these  mixed  cases  will  be  easy,  and reduce  what  I  have  to  say  on  this  head  into  a  narrow  com- pass ;  for  all  kinds  of  wheels  where  the  water  cannot descend  through  a  given  space,  unless  the  wheel  moves therewith,  are  to  be  considered  of  the  nature  of  an  overshot wheel,  according  to  the  perpendicular  height  that  the  water descends  from ;  and  all  those  that  receive  the  impulse  or shock  of  the  water,  whether  in  a  horizontal,  perpendicular, or  oblique  direction,  are  to  be  considered  as  undershots; and,  therefore,  a  wheel,  which  the  water  strikes,  at  a  certain point  below  the  surface  of  the  head,  and,  after  that,  descends in  the  arch  of  a  circle,  pressing,  b;^  its  gravity,  upon  the wheel ;  the  effect  of  such  a  wheel  will  be  equal  to  the  effect of  an  undershot,  whose  head  is  equal  to  the  difference  of level  between  the  surface  of  the  water  in  the  reservoir  and the  point  where  it  strikes  the  wheel,  added  to  that  of  an overshot,  whose  height  is  equal  to  the  difference  of  level between  the  point  where  it  strikes  the  wheel  and  the  level of  the  tail  water."
It  is  here  supposed  that  the  wheel  receives  the  shock  of the  water  at  right  angles  to  its  radii,  and  that  the  velocity of  its  circumference  is  properly  adapted  to  receive  the
86
BREAST  WHEELS. Fig.  29.
THE  SLIDING  HATCH.  87
utmost  advantage  of  both  these  powers ;  otherwise  a reduction  must  be  made  on  that  account.
Here  Mr.  Smeaton  leaves  the  subject ;  his  remarks  having suggested  considerable  improvements  on  the  common  prac- tice of  his  day,  and  dispelled  many  popular  errors.  The principles  he  developed,  and  the  rules  he  deduced  from them,  were  productive  of  great  practical  benefit;  and  hia papers  may  still  be  studied  with  much  advantage.
The  late  Mr.  Eennie  mav  be  said  to  have  continued  these researches ;  and,  in  1784,  he  erected  a  large  breast-wheel, worked  by  the  weight  of  the  water  alone.  To  this  wheel  he jfirst  apphed  the  sliding  hatch,  over  which  the  water  flowed upon  the  wheel,  instead  of  issuing  under  the  hatch  or  sluice, as  formerly ;  and  by  this  means  the  whole  height  of  the  fall is  realised.
In  this  case,  the  sluice  or  hatch  is  to  be  drawn  up,  in order  to  stop  the  flow  of  water,  which  runs  over  it ;  whereas, before  this  time,  it  was  let  down  to  shut  off  the  water running  out  below.
The  water  ran  over  the  top  of  the  sliding  hatch,  as  over  a dam,  in  a  thin  sheet,  and  was  laid  upon  the  breast  of  the wheel,  or  below  the  level  of  the  axle,  where  it  acted,  by  its gravity,  upon  the  float  boards ;  being  held  up  to  the  breast by  masonry  cut  to  a  circidar  arc,  drawn  from  the  centre, fitting  the  wheels'  circumference,  and  confining  the  water  on all  sides,  so  that  none  of  it  could  escape  without  doing  its part  in  the  work ;  for  the  float-boards  filled  the  channel,  and there  were  sole-boards  upon  the  rim  of  the  wheel.  Here let  it  be  observed,  that  these  sole-boards,  which  form  an pbtuse  angle  with  the  floats,  are  notched  upon  the  oak starts  to  which  the  float-boards  are  fixed ;  but  they  do  not completely  close  the  wheel  rim;  a  long  narrow  slit  or opening  is  left  across  the  face  of  the  water-wheel,  between the  starts,  permitting  the  air  to  escape,  and  the  water  fireely to  enter,  as  each  bucket  or  float  presents  itself  to  receive  its load ;  and  should  the  river  be  flooded,  and  rise  against  the wheel,  so  that  it  "runs  in  backwater,"  the  ready  admission of  air  from  above  prevents  a  partial  vacuum  from  being formed  between  the  floats,  which  would  tend  to  retard  the escape  of  the  water,  and  thus  reduce  the  useful  effects. Although  in  this  wheel,  which  is  without  "  shrouding  "  or sides,  there  is  but  lifctle  cavity  or  depth  to  cause  such  reten- tion, yet  in  large  wheels,  with  well-buckets  and  deep shrouaing,  the  loss  of  power  would  be  important.    It  has
88
FOBMS  OF  BUCKETS.
always  been  the  author's  practice,  even  in  over-shot  wheels, to  make  provision  for  ventilating  the  buckets,  and  prevent *•  the  suction,"  as  workmen  say,  from  the  tail  water.  As, however,  there  is  sometimes  a  little  water  lost  by  this means,  and  the  orifice  so  left  is  more  effectual  when  made larger,  especially  when  buckets  of  much  capacity  are  used instead  of  floats,  as  they  now  frequently  are,  in  breast- wheels,  an  ingenious  method  of  ventilating  the  buckets  has been  proposed  by  Mr.  Pairbaim,  which  is  well  worth  the little  extra  cost  it  may  occasion  in  the  first  outlay  of  capital required  for  the  erection  of  a  large  wheel.
Pig.  80.
Fig.  31.
ProporUoDB  of  Backets.
Ventilating  Buckets.
In  order  to  lay  the  water  upon  these  wheels  with  the velocit]^  required,  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  keep  the  stream in  a  thin  sheet,  Mr.  Eennie  next  adopted  a  double  hatch,  or sluice — adding,  as  it  were,  another  hatch,  fixed  above  the first ;  so  that,  bv  an  adjustment  of  the  two,  a  narrow opening  might  be  left  between  them,  capable  of  nice  ref- lation to  every  variation  of  power  required  for  the  quantity of  work  to  be  done  in  the  mill.  The  upper  hatch  dipped just  so  much  below  the  water's  surface  as  to  give  the
THE  BOtTBLB  HATCH.
89
iieedfiil  head  above  the  orifice  to  produce  a  jet  flowing  with the  desired  speed;  and  the  under  hatch  being  raised  or lowered  bj  racks  and  pinions,  the  thickness  of  the  stream delirered  upon  the  wheel,  was  diminished  or  increased  at
Fig.  32.
S     ^     ^     ?     t     ?
WATBB-WHXXL  AT  WALTHAH  ABBBT.
90  GOVERNORS  OR  REGULATORS.
pleasure,  while  it  continued  to  drive  the  mill  at  an  uniform rate,  by  varying  the  load  or  quantity  of  water.
The  next  improvement  was  the  application  of  the  governor, or  regulator,  to  adjust  the  supply  of  water  to  the  wheel, without  the  attention  of  the  miller ;  so  that,  the  slightest variation  in  the  demand  for  power  in  the  mill  or  factory might  be  met  by  a  corresponding  expenditure  on  the  prime mover.
The  double  revolving  pendulum,  adopted,  as  a  regulator for  the  steam-engine,  by  Mr.  Watt,  is  generally  used ;  and as  the  governor-balls  fly  out  or  collapse,  the  one  or  other  of a  pair  of  bevilled  wheels  is  engaged  and  disengaged,  so  as  to turn  the  pinion  spindle,  or  endless  screw,  in  opposite  direc- tions, and  so  moving  the  racks  to  raise  or  lower  the  sluice. Some  of  the  French  mechanicians  use  a  strong  circular beUows,  weighted  on  the  upper  boards  and  having  a  small opening  for  the  escape  of  the  air,  so  adjusted  that  when  the wheel  is  working  at  the  proper  speed  the  upper  board  of  the bellows  is  maintained  at  a  certain  level,  but  when  the  wheel goes  a  little  too  fast,  the  air  accumulates  in  the  bellows  and raises  the  upper  board,  when  a  projecting  iron  finger  fixed upon  it  "  strikes  into  gear  "  one  of  the  bevilled  wheels,  and disengages  the  other.  The  machinery  so  put  in  motion diminishes  the  supply  of  water,  and  the  speed  of  the  whole is  reduced.  On  the  contrary,  when  the  water-wheel  goes too  slow,  and  the  bellows  are  not  Ailly  inflated,  the  iipper board  sinks,  and  the  iron  finger  reversing  the  motion  of  the pinion  spindle  opens  the  sluice,  and  increases  the  supply  of water ;  but  powerful  bellows  may  act  directly  on  the  sluice itself.  Sometimes  when  applied  to  overshot  wheels,  the governor  moves  a  slide,  with  many  long  narrow  openings  in it,  which  coincide  with  similar  openings  in  a  metal  plate  in the  bottom  of  the  pentrough,  or  spout,  which  is  closed  at the  end,  so  that  the  water  must  pass  through  these openings  to  the  wheel;  and,  as  they  enlarge  or  contract with  every  movement  of  the  vigilant  governor,  the  speed  of the  wheel  is  kept  uniform  and  steady.  When  the  water  is laid  on  the  shoulder  of  the  wheel,  a  curved  slide,  or  a  broad band  of  leather,  rolled  on  or  off  a  cylinder  or  roller,  of  small diameter,  is  substituted  for  a  sluice.  The  leather  is  fastened at  the  lower  end  to  a  curved  grating,  adapted  to  the  form  of the  wheel ;  and,  at  the  other  end,  to  the  roUer,  which descends  as  the  leather  rolls  upon  it ;  and  the  water  flows over  the  roller  as  it  does  over  Mr.  Bennie's  hatch.    Latterly
BBEAST  WHEELS.  91
the  curved  slide,  or  sluice,  the  segment  of  a  circle,  fitting the  periphery  of  the  wheel,  has  been  preferred  to  the leather  band  and  roller,  as  being  more  durable;  and  the sluice  is  now  better  fitted,  since  improved  tools  have  been introduced  in  the  manufacture  of  machinerj.
There  are  several  other  modes  of  applying  governors ;  but these  will,  perhaps,  be  considered  sufficient.
Breast-wheels  are  often  made  wide  across  the  face,  and  of considerable  power.  One  of  the  widest  was  erected  many years  ago,  by  Messrs.  Strutt,  at  their  Belper  cotton-mills. It  was  40  feet  wide,  but  only  12  feet  6  inches  diameter ; the  shaft  was  made  hollow,  like  a  cask,  and  so  large  as  to form  the  body  of  the  wheel,  the  float-boards  being  fixed immediately  upon  it.  This  hollow  axis  was  48  feet  long, composed  of  thirty-two  staves,  6  inches  thick,  bound together  by  iron  hoops ;  the  diameter  in  the  middle  was 7  feet  2  inches,  tapering  to  5  feet  at  one  end,  and  6  feet at  the  other,  upon  which  a  toothed  wheel,  14  feet  in diameter,  was  placed.  The  ends  of  this  barrel  were  made solid  for  3  feet  at  the  small  end,  and  4  feet  at  the  larger,  to receive  the  gudgeons  or  pivots  on  which  it  turned.  The float-boards,  twenty-four  in  number,  did  not  come  in  imme- diate contact  with  the  barrel,  but  a  space  of  2  inches  was left  for  the  air  to  escape.  The  length  of  the  float-board was  divided  into  ten  parts,  and  these  were  supported  by rings  fixed  upon  the  hollow  axis,  placed  4  feet  apart.  The divisions  of  the  float-boards  were  not  placed  in  line  with each  other,  but  every  one  in  advance  of  the  next,  by  equal steps,  so  that  the  water  might  not  strike  the  whole  length of  40  feet  at  once,  but  act  in  a  rapid  succession  of  intervals, and  thus  make  the  stroke  imperceptible.
A  pair  of  very  powerful  wheels  were  erected  about twenty-five  years  ago,  at  the  Catrine  Works  in  Ayrshire,  by Messrs.  Fairbaim  and  Lillie.  It  was  originally  intended to  have  four  of  these  wheels,  and  provision  was  made  for receiving  them,  shoidd  the  factory  be  extended  and  require more  power;  but  at  present  two  wheels  are  sufficiently powerral,  except  in  very  dry  seasons,  to  turn  the  whole work  of  the  mills.
These  wheels  are  each  60  feet  in  diameter;  10  feet  6 inches  wide  inside  the  buckets  ;  and  15  inches  deep  in  the shroud;  they  are  fitted  with  internal  toothed  segments forming  a  circle  of  48  feet  6  inches  diameter ;  the  teeth  are 3i  inches  pitch,  and  the  breadth  is  15  inches.    The  fiall  of
92  BUBASr  WHEELS*
water,  conreyed  from  the  Eiyer  Ayr,  is  48  feet,  and  tha power  of  the  two  wheels  240  horses.
When  iron  is  used  to  make  water-wheels,  as  is  now  very generally  the  practice,  curred  buckets  and  shrouding  are preferred  to  deal  float-boards  and  oak  starts.
In  designing  these  iron  wheels,  care  should  be  taken  that, while  attempting  to  form  a  bucket  which  shall  carry  the water  as  long  as  it  can  act  beneficially,  the  openings  or mouths  of  the  buckets  shall  not  be  so  contracted  as  to prevent  the  free  admission  of  water  into  them,  or  its  free discharge  at  the  bottom  of  the  wheel.
Mr.  Fairbaim  from  his  experience  states  that,  in  the construction  of  wheels  for  high  falls,  the  best  proportion  of the  opening  of  the  bucket  is  proved  to  be  nearly  as  5  to  24 ; that  IS,  the  contents  of  the  bucket  being  24  cubic  feet,  the area  of  the  opening,  or  entrance  for  the  water,  would  be 5  square  feet.
In  breast- wheels,  which  receive  the  water  at  a  height  of ten  to  twelve  degrees  above  the  horizontal  centre,  the  ratio should  be  nearly  as  8  to  24,  or  as  1  to  3.  With  these  pro- portions, the  depth  of  the  shrouding  is  assumed  to  be  about three  times  the  width  of  the  opening,  or  three  times  the distance  from  the  lip  to  the  back  of  the  bucket,  the  opening being  5  inches,  and  the  depth  of  the  shroud  15  inches.
These  proportions  are  shown  in  Mffvre  30.
For  lower  falls,  or  those  wheels  which  receive  the  water below  the  horizontal  centre,  a  larger  opening  becomes necessary  for  the  reception  of  a  larger  body  of  water,  and its  final  discharge.
In  the  construction  of  water-wheels  it  is  requisite,  in order  to  obtain  the  maximum  effect,  to  have  the  opening  of the  bucket  sufficiently  large  to  allow  an  easy  entrance  and an  equally  free  escape  for  the  water,  as  its  retention  in  the bucket  must  evidently  be  injurious  when  carried  beyond  the vertical  centre,  or  perpendicular  line  below  the  wheel's  axis.
A  new  mode  of  applying  the  water  to  wheels  worked  by low  falls  has  been  introduced  by  M.  Poncelet,  whose  works on  hydraulics  and  especially  on  water-wheels  are  well  known ; his  mode  is  fully  elucidated  in  his  '*  Memoire  sur  les  Boues Hydrauliques  h,  Aubes-Courbes,  mues  par-dessous.*'  (Beport on  Water-wheels  with  Curved  Buckets,  worked  below.) This  distinguished  engineer  visited  England  during  the Great  Exhibition,  and  was  appointed  chairman  oi  the  juiy on  manufacturing  machines  and  tools ;  he  also  acted  as  a
M.  poncblbt's  wheel.  93
member  of  the  jury  on  machinery,  and  gained  the  esteem  of all  who  had  the  pleasure  of  meeting  him  in  that  capacity, for  which  his  rank  as  General  of  Engineers  in  the  French service,  his  acknowledged  talent  and  practical  knowledge , combined  to  make  him  peculiarly  eligible.
M.  Poncelet's  method  is  especially  well  suited  for  falls under  eight  feet  in  height,  and  where  the  quantity  of  water is  large,  as  by  this  mode  of  working  the  wheel  from  below, it  is  not  subjected  to  a  load  of  water,  but  receives  it,  as  it were,  imder  pressure.  This  wheel  consequently  can  be made  very  light,  although  of  great  power,  with  arms  of wrought-iron,  like  the  paddle-wheels  oi  a  steam  packet ;  and as  it  can  be  driven  at  a  greater  rate  than  the  breast-wheel, a  larger  quantity  of  water  may  be  brought  to  bear  upon  a narrower  wheel.  It  is  fitted  with  curved  buckets,  deeper than  those  of  the  breast-wheel,  and  without  backs  or  sole- boards,  so  that  within  the  rim  of  the  wheel  they  are  alto- gether open,  and  as  the  air  can  offer  no  impediment  to  the water's  entrance  or  exit,  the  buckets  are  more  numerous and  their  mouths  narrower ;  one  great  object  in  this  design being  to  make  the  action  of  the  water  continuous ;  avoiding the  shock  experienced  in  the  undershot-wheel;  the  water enters  them  nearly  at  the  lowest  point  of  the  wheel,  and  atf a  tangent  to  it,  issuing  from  beneath  a  curved  sluice,  which is  opened  by  being  drawn  upwards  by  racks  and  pinions. This  sluice  is  nearly  in  contact  with  the  wheel,  so  that  the thin  broad  stream  of  water  acts  directly  upon  the  buckets with  all  the  pressure  due  to  its  head ;  and  as  they  present themselves  in  rapid  succession,  this  pressure  is  almost constant.
The  sluice  is  placed  in  an  inclined  position,  leaning  as  it were  against  the  water,  and  is  held  down  by  radius  bars extending  from  the  back  of  it  to  the  masonry  below ;  these bars,  being  jointed  at  both  ends,  serve  not  only  to  retain  the sluice  in  its  proper  place,  but  to  ^de  it  as  it  opens  or  shuts down  upon  the  sill.  The  sluice  is  made  of  cast-iron,  bolted together  with  flanched  joints,  planed  to  fit  close,  and  form one  large  plate  of  equal  breadth  with  the  wheel,  and  at  the sides  it  is  kept  tight  by  coining  close  to  the  stonework,  or to  cast-iron  sides,  against  which  a  strong  leather  packing, secured  to  the  sides  of  the  sluice,  is  pressed  by  the  force  of the  water.
The  woodcut  here  given  is  taken  from  a  drawing  exhibited at  the  Institution  of  Civil  Engineers,  and  represents  a  water-
M.  pokcelet's  wheel.  95
wheel  on  M.  Poncelet's  system,  erected  by  M.  De  Bergue, who  stated  that  this  wheel,  16  feet  8  inches  in  diameter, and  30  feet  wide ;  driven  by  a  fall  of  water  6  feet  6  inches high,  yielding  120,000  cubic  feet  per  minute ;  was  about  180 horse-power  when  the  circumference  moved  at  the  rate  ot 11  to  12  feet  per  second :  that  a  breast- wheel,  worked  by the  gravity  of  the  water  in  the  usual  way,  and  travelling  at the  ordinary  rate,  must  have  been  90  feet  wide  to  produce the  same  effect ;  and  that  the  speed  of  the  wheel  was  about fifty-five  per  cent,  of  that  of  the  water.
Keferrmg  to  M.  Poncelet's  "  Memoires,"  before  mentioned, in  the  second  part,  "  Sur  des  Experiences  en  Grand,"  after having  given  the  most  elaborate  details  of  his  experiments, and  tabulated  them  with  all  the  method  in  which  the  Frenct engineers  excel,  he  says,  under  the  head  of  Calcul  de  la Vitesse  et  de  la  Force  de  la  Boue, — "  With  the  various  data which  preceded,  we  shall  be  in  a  position  completely  to determine  in  a  manner  sufficiently  exact  for  practice,  all  the dimensions  of  the  wheel ;  to  calculate  its  most  advantageous velocity,  the  power  it  will  transmit  to  the  machinery  when working  at  the  maximum  of  effect,  and  the  effect  it  is  capable of  exerting  tangentially  to  its  circumference.
"  With  respect  to  most  advantageous  speed  of  the  wheel, it  maj  be  admitted,  in  accordance  with  the  results  of  the expenments,  that  it  remains  compressed  between  50  and 60  per  cent  of  the  velocity  due  theoretically  to  the  water  level above  the  centre  of  the  or^ce,  the  last  number  having  relation to  low  Mis  and  large  openings,  the  other  to  high  fisdls  and small  openings  of  the  sluice ;  so  that  for  the  medium  flails  of 1*3  metres  (about  4  feet  3  inches)  above  the  sill  of  the aperture,  with  medium  openings  of  20  centimetres  (7*87, say  8  inches,)  the  ratio  of  the  speed  will  be  nearly  55  per cent.  As  to  the  quantity  of  action  transmitted  integrally  to the  wheel,  when  it  travels  at  this  speed,  it  may  also  be admitted  that  the  mean  will  be  60  per  cent  of  that  which is  due  to  the  total  fall,  but  that  it  will  be  somewhat  less  for the  higher  falls  and  smaller  openings  of  sluices,  and  some- what more  for  lower  falls  and  larger  openings."
This  corresponds  with  Mr.Eennie's  experiments,  noticed  in a  former  part  of  this  book.  The  reader  who  wishes  further to  investigate  this  subject,  would  do  well  to  obtain  General Fencelet's  work,  the  new  edition,  containing  the  "Second M6moire  "  on  experiments  made  on  the  large  scale,  which it  is  hoped  may  &id  a  translator  into  the  English  language,
W  "WATER  PRESSUBJS-ENOINS.
together  with  the  researches  of  MM.  Foncelet  and  Lesbros on  the  Flow  of  "Water.  Enough  perhaps  has  been  quoted in  this  little  book  to  direct  attention  to  those  important works,  which  do  honour  to  their  authors  and  to  the  govem- xnent  which  enabled  them  to  make  their  experiments.
In  a  discussion  which  took  place  at  the  Institution  of Civil  Engineers,  when  M.  De  Bergue  produced  the  drawing here  engraved,  the  only  point  noticed  as  requiring  im- provement was  the  masonry  below  the  wheel ;  it  was  thought that  the  platform  of  the  race  should  stop  somewhat  short of  the  vertical  line,  so  that  the  rising  buckets  might  be emptied  as  soon  as  they  passed  it,  and  thus  avoid  the possibility  of  retardation  from  their  retaining  any  water after  it  had  ceased  to  be  usefuL
CHAPTEE  XI.
THE  WATEB  PRESSUBE-ENGINE  AND  THE  WATEB-BAIC.
Having  considered  the  means  of  obtaining  mechanical power  with  a  rotary  motion,  it  is  now  proposed  to  describe another  mode  of  employing  the  power  of  water  in  a  manner essentially  different,  out  not  less  useful  and  important, which  has  been  too  much  neglected  in  this  country*  The advantages  to  be  derived  from  the  use  of  the  watss PBESSUBE-ENGiNE,  in  hilly  districts,  where  high  heads  and an  abundant  supply  of  water  are  found,  especially  when mines  exist  in  the  same  locality,  and  require  to  be  drained in  order  to  work  out  the  ore,  or  when  power  is  wanted  to raise  the  ore  from  the  mines,  seem  so  obvious,  that  it  is strange  to  think  such  ready  and  effectual  help  to  the  miner should  be  passed  by ;  for  the  reciprocating  motion  of  the pressure-engines  may  not  only  be  applied  directly  to  the pumps,  but  may  also,  by  using  cranks  and  fly-wheels  like those  of  the  steam-engin^,  be  made  to  turn  the  winding machinery  and  the  crushing  mills,  or  any  other  revolving mechanism.  Thus,  by  the  pressure-engine  and  the  turbine, the  power  of  waterfalls  of  any  height,  however  great,  may at  once  be  made  available.
The  first  invention  of  the  water  pressure^^ngine,  like
THE   OEBMAN  ENGINES.  97
many  other  mechanical  contrivaiices,  appears  to  belong  to Germany,  and  probably  had  its  origin  in  Hungary,  where so  many  ingenious  machines,  actuated  by  water,  have  long been  used.
In  the  pressure-engine  the  power  is  obtained  from  a descending  column  of  water  actmg  by  its  weight  or  hydro- static pressure  upon  the  piston  of  a  cylinder,  in  the  same way  that  steam  is  employed ;  but  as  steam  is  an  elastic fluid,  and  water  (practically  speaking)  is  not,  care  must  be taken  to  prevent  any  sudden  check  to  the  motion  of  the water,  which  might  break  or  damage  the  engine,  and  pro- vision must  be  made  to  relieve  the  mechanism  from  any accidental  shock  so  produced.  In  other  respects,  the  action and  the  application  of  the  water  nearly  resemble  that  of high-pressure  steam.
The  Germans  appear  to  have  made  successive  improve- ments upon  their  original  engines,  and  to  have  extended, from  time  to  time,  their  usefulness  and  employment,  of which  two  important  examples  may  be  given.
The  one  is  at  lUsang,  in  Bavaria,  at  the  salt-works,  which are  situated  on  the  southern  part  of  the  kingdom.  These works  are  supplied  from  a  mine  of  rock-salt  in  the  valley  of Bergtesgaden,  and  from  the  salt-springs  in  Beichenhall, where  the  salt  was  formerly  purified  by  solution  and evaporation  ;  but  as  this  operation  could  not  be  carried  on with  advantage,  on  account  of  the  scarcity  of  fuel,  the saturated  briAe  is  now  conveyed  by  a  line  of  pipes  seven inches  in  diameter,  through  wnich  it  is  forced  from  stage  to stage  for  a  distance  of  about  sixty  miles  by  a  series  of  nine pressure-engines,  acted  upon  by  falls  of  water  from  the  hills and  each  of  them  working  a  pump.
A  description  of  these  engines  will  be  found  in  the  Pro- ceedings of  the  Institution  of  Civil  Engineers,  and  an excellent  drawing,  by  Mr.  W.  L.  Baker,  of  one  of  the  best engines  of  the  series,  constructed  by  M.  de  Eeichenbach,  is in  the  collection  of  the  Institution.  This  engine  has  a cylinder  of  twenty-six  inches  in  diameter,  with  a  stroke  of four  feet,  making,  in  regular  work,  five  strokes  per  minute  ; it  is  made  entirely  of  brass,  and  is  an  exceedingly  good machine  both  in  design  and  workmanship.  very  few working  parts  are  visible,  and  it  acts  almost  without  noise, the  sliding  valves,  or  rather  sliding  pistons,  which  regulate the  engine's  action,  being  also  moved  by  water  pressure.
The  other  example,  at  Freyberg,  in  Saxony,  is  an  engine
98  THE  WATER-PRESSTJEE  ENGINE.
constructed,  in  the  year  1824,  bj  MM.  Brendal,  for  draining the  Alte  Mordgmbe  mine.  It  has  two  single-acting  cylinders attached  to  opposite  ends  of  a  working  beam,  by  means  of arched  heads  and  chains  ;  the  cylinders  are  open  at  top,  and have  strong  piston-rods  of  timber.  The  pressure  of  the water  acts  alternately  under  the  piston  of  either  cylinder, and  forces  it  upwards,  whilst  the  piston  of  the  cylmder  at the  other  end  of  the  bearer  is  depressed  by  the  weight  of  the pump-rods.  A  bell  crank,  attached  to  each  piston-rod  gives motion  to  the  pump-rods,  each  working  twenty-two  pumps, placed  one  above  the  other,  lying  at  an  angle  of  forty-five degrees,  and  dividing  the  lift  of  each  set  of  pumps  into twenty-two  heights  or  stages  of  about  30  feet.  The  engine is  placed  360  feet  under  ground.  The  cylinders  are  of  cast- iron,  18  inches  in  diameter,  with  a  stroke  of  9  feet,  and  the usefiil  effect  was  computed  by  M.  von  Gerstner  to  be  70 per  cent,  of  the  power  expended.  A  section  of  one  of these  cylinders  has  been  sent  to  the  author  by  a  friend  at Wiesbaden,  and  a  very  complete  drawing  of  this  eng^e by  Mr.  Baker  will  be  found  at  the  Institution  of  Civil aeers.
Phe  first  water-pressure  engine  used  in  England  was erected  by  Mr.  "William  Westgarth,  at  a  lead  mine  belonging to  Sir  Walter  Blacket,  in  the  county  of  Northumberland  in the  year  1765.
The  cylinder  of  this  engine  was  equal  in  length  to  the whole  height  of  the  fall  of  water ;  it  was  open  at  the  top, and  the  water  ran  into  the  open  top  of  the  cylinder  by  a trough ;  the  piston  worked  in  a  bored  chamber,  at  the  lower end  of  the  cylinder,  of  10  inches  in  diameter,  and  was attached  by  a  chain  to  the  arched  head  of  an  engine-beam placed  above,  the  opposite  end  of  the  beam  suspending  a wooden  rod,  which  passed  down  the  pit  to  work  the  pump.
The  column  of  water  always  pressed  upon  the  top  of  the piston,  but  by  admitting  water  below  the  piston,  the  pressure was  neutralised,  and  the  piston  was  raised  by  the  weight  of the  descending  pump-rods.
On  closing  the  communication  with  the  underside  of  the piston,  and  discharging  the  water  from  the  cylinder  bottom, the  pressure  of  the  colunm  again  acted  upon  the  piston  and sent  it  down.  By  a  simple  self-acting  piece  of  mechanism, similar  to  the  working-gear  of  the  steam-engines  of  that time,  the  orifices  were  alternately  opened  and  shut,  and  the reciprocating  motion  of  the  engine  continued.
MR.    WESTGARTH^S   ENGINE.  99
A  detailed  account,  with  drawings  of  this  engine,  was submitted  to  the  Society  of  Arts,  in  the  year  1769,  and printed  in  the  fifth  volume  of  the  Society's  Transactions  in 1787.  The  description  and  drawings  were  made  by  Mr. Smeaton,  and  a  working-model  then  constructed  from  them is  in  the  Society's  possession.  The  Society  voted  fifty guineas  to  Mr.  Westgarth,  and  presented  a  silver  medal, with  their  thanks,  to  Mr.  Smeaton,  for  his  excellent  account of  so  valuable  an  invention.
The  author  has  careftdly  examined  these  interesting memorials  of  the  early  encouragement  given  the  inventive genius  by  the  Society  of  Arts,  which  continues  with  re- newed energy  its  career  of  public  usefulness,  under  the presidency  of  Prince  Albert.  He  is  satisfied,  not  only  from the  evidence  which  the  machine  itself  offers,  differing  as  it does  entirely  from  any  of  the  German  engines,  but  from  the written  testimony  of  Mr.  Smeaton,  that  Mr.  Westgarth' s Pressure-engine  was  his  own  invention ;  and  that  he  bor- rowed no  part  of  it,  either  in  plan  or  in  detail,  from  any- thing then  or  previously  existing  on  the  continent.  !ffis idea  appears  to  have  been  taken  from  the  single-acting  open- topped  atmospheric  engirie  of  the  period ;  substituting  the pressure  of  a  column  of  water  for  the  pressure  of  the atmosphere.
The  liberality  and  goodness  of  heart  which  distinguished Mr.  Smeaton,  no  less  than  his  high  talent  and  skill  as  a civil  engineer,  appear*  conspicuously  in  the  correspondence alluded  to,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  foUowing  short  extracts : —
Austhorpe,  April  29,  1769. "  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  the  first  complete  engine of  this  kind  at  work  in  the  summer  of  1766,  for  draining or  unwatering  a  lead  mine  belonging  to  Sir  Walter  Blacket, at  Caldcleugh,  in  the  county  of  Northumberland:  since which,  that  machine  has  been  shown  to  all  those  that  had the  curiosity  to  see  it.  Mi'.  Westgarth  has  now  erected  four others  in  the  different  mines  of  that  neighbourhood,  one  of which  I  have  seen,  and  all  attended  with  equal  success."
In  a  subsequent  letter,  Mr.  Smeaton  says : — "  Mr.  Westgarth  was  induced  to  think  of  applying  for  a patent  for  the  exclusive  privilege  of  using  this  invention, but  previous  thereto,  he  was  pleased  to  advise  with  me
F  2
100  THE  WATER-PRESSTJKB  ENGINE.
concerning  it,  being  frequently  at  that  time  in  those  parts of  the  country  as  an  agent  of  Greenwich  Hospital.
"  Much  as  I  admired  the  ingenuity  of  Mr.  Westgarth's inyention,  I  dissuaded  him  from  the  thoughts  of  a  patent, as  it  would  take  a  length  of  time  to  be  suflSciently  known, and  the  number  of  cases  in  which  it  could  be  properly- applied  were  not  sufficient  to  afford  such  a  number  of  pre- miums as  might  defray  the  expense  of  a  patent,  with  a prospect  of  advantage  to  himself  and  family.
"  1  therefore  recommended  it  to  him,  as  the  Society  for the  encouragement  of  Arts,  Manufactures,  and  Commerce were,  by  handsome  premiums  and  boimties,  encouragers  of all  useftil  inyentions  and  iraproTements,  to  communicate  his inyention  to  them,  that  it  might  be  made  public,  in  confidence that  he  would  obtain  a  bounty  for  the  same,  of  such  value as  to  the  Society  should  seem  meet :  and  in  conse<Juence hereof,  I  gaye  him  a  representation  of  the  utility  of  his inyention,  with  which,  in  the  year  1769,  he  applied  to  the said  Society,  and  obtained  a  bounty  upon  condition  he delivered  to  the  Society  a  working-mooel  and  a  draught showing  the  construction  of  the  engine :  but  as  the  death of  Mr.  Westgarth,  which  happened  not  long  after,  prevented the  usefiilness  of  the  machine  from  being  so  successfully spread,  as  it  doubtless  otherwise  would  have  been ;  and  as some  of  the  most  essential  parts  of  the  machine  cannot  be seen  in  the  model,  without  taking  it  to  pieces ;  and  the drawing  not  being  accompanied  with  any  literal  explanation, nor  the  details  of  it  sufficiently  made  out ;  at  the  request  of the  Society,  I  have  now  supplied  these  defects,  that  it may  be  published  in  such  a  manner  that  the  utility  of  it may  be  seen,  and  the  means  of  making  and  applying  it  be explained."
It  appears  that  on  seeing  Mr.  "Westgarth's  engine,  Mr. Smeaton  suggested  to  him  that  if  the  engine,  instead  of  the great  lever  or  balance  beam,  were  made  to  work  with  a wheel,  and  instead  of  the  long  spear  going  down  the descending  pump  trees,  the  pistons  were  made  to  communi- cate with  the  main  chain  through  a  collar  of  leathers  or stuffed  collar,  that  then  the  whole  of  the  machinery  would stand  together,  just  above  the  level  or  sough,  and  there would  take  up  less  room,  as  the  work  might  in  general  be comprehended  within  the  limits  of  the  shaft ;  and  the descending  pipe  might  also  be  of  a  less  bore,  and  be  fixed in  a  comer  of  the  shaft,  and,  therefore,  be  upon  the  whole,
ME,   SMEATON's  engine.  101
much  more  convenient  for  underground  works ;  and  on  this mode  the  latest  engines  of  Mr.  Westgarth  were  actually constructed  with  success.  So  that  little  was  wanting  except the  perfection  of  modem  workmanship,  to  render  the  engine complete,  although  it  was  not  made  direct-acting,  as  the engines  recently  made  generally  are.
Mr.  Smeaton  constructed  a  water-pressure  engine,  in 1770,  at  Temple  Newsam,  Yorkshire,  to  work  a  pump  for supplying  Lord  Irwin's  residence.  It  was,  of  course,  of small  size;  and  the  pressure  being  communicated  to  the cylinder  by  an  inclined  pipe,  bringing  the  water  from  some distance.  He  modified  and  improved  the  ]jlan  of  Mr,  West- garth,  closing  the  cylindrical  tube,  and  using  the  piston-rod with  a  stuffed  collar ;  still,  however,  retaining  in  its  original form,  or  nearly  so,  the  ingenious  slide-valve  designed  by Mr.  Westgarth.
This  was  a  cylindrical  hoop  or  ring,  sliding,  for  a  short distance,  up  and  down  a  pipe  which  it  encircled,  the  pipe having  two  sets  of  openings,  separated  by  a  horizontal bridge  or  partition.  The  valve  was  inclosed  in  a  box attached  to  the  branch  pipe  of  the  cylinder,  and  sustained the  pressure  of  the  columns  equally  in  all  directions ;  and  it was  rendered  water-tight  by  strips  of  leather.
When  the  upper  openings  in  the  pipe  were  exposed  above the  water,  the  water  entered  the  cylinder  below  the  piston  ; but  when  the  lower  set  of  apertures  was  opened,  by  raising the  cylindrical  valve,  the  water  escaped  from  the  cylinder ; the  position  of  the  valve  at  the  same  time  shutting  off  the further  entrance  of  the  water  and  its  pressure  upon  the piston.  The  openings  were,  in  the  first  instance,  square holes;  but  afterwards  they  were  made  in  the  form  of  a lozenge  or  rhombus,  with  the  acute  angle  upwards,  so  that the  water  might  enter  and  be  shut  off  more  gradually.
After  Mr.  Smeaton' s  time,  the  water-pressure  engine seems  to  have  remained  in  abeyance,  and  none  were  made until  Mr.  Trevitheck  revived  their  use.  The  great  improve- ments made  in  the  steam-engine  by  Mr.  Watt  caused  water- engines  of  all  kinds  to  be  neglected,  and  even  water-wheels were,  in  many  cases,  superseded  by  steam-engines.  Water power  went  out  of  fashion,  and  was  generally  considered  to be  too  precarious  and  expensive,  as  compared  with  steam,  to deserve  much  attention  from  engineers.
Lately,  however,  more  enlarged  views  have  been  taken. Men  who  stand  high  in  their  profession  have  turned  their
102
ALPORT   MINE-ENGINE.
attention  to  this  subject,  and  it  has  been  more  studied  and better  understood.
Mr.  Trevitheck  constructed  several  water-pressure  engines,
Fig.  84.
one  of  which  was  erected  in  Derbyshire,  in  1803,  and  is  still at  work  at  the  Alport  mines.  The  cylinder  of  this  engine is  30  inches  in  diameter.
Flff.  3S.
104
THE  WATBE-PRESSURB  ENGINE.
In  1841  Mr.  John  Taylor,  well  known  for  his  long experience  in  mining  operations,  and  whose  application  of water-wheels  to  the  working  of  pumps  has  already  been mentioned,  advised  the  employment  of  another  and  more powerful  engine  at  the  Alport  mines,  near  BakeweU,  which was  made  under  the  author's  direction,  at  the  Butterley works.  This  was  the  most  powerful  engine  of  the  kind  that had  been  made.  The  cylinder  is  50  inches  in  diameter,  and the  stroke  10  feet.  It  is  worked  by  a  column  of  water 132  feet  high,  acting  below  the  piston,  and  lifting,  by  direct action,  a  weighted  plunger-pole,  42  inches  in  diameter, which  raises  the  water  from  the  mine  to  a  height  of 132  feet ;  so  that  the  proportion  of  power  to  effect  is  as  the area  of  the  piston  to  that  of  the  plunger :  namely,  1963  to 1385,  or  full  70  per  cent.     (See  figs.  34,  35,  and  36.)
Fig.  86.
Mr.  Darlington,  who  has  the  care  of  the  machinery  at the  mines,  and  who  fixed  this  engine  in  the  shaft,  in  a  letter to  the  author,  says  that  the  engine  has  never  cost  them  £12 a  year  since  it  was  erected.
The  usual  speed  is  about  five  strokes  per  minute,  but  it will  work  at  the  rate  of  seven  strokes,  without  any  con- cussion in  the  descending  column ;   the  duty  actually  done
ALPORT   MINE-ENGINE.  105
being  then  equal  to  168  horses'  power  of  33,000  pounds, raised  one  foot  high  in  a  minute.  Thus  the  area  of  the plunger,  3  feet  6  inches  in  diameter,  is  9621  square  feet  X lO  feet,  the  length  of  stroke,  x  seven  strokes  per  minute  = 673*47  cubic  feet  raised  132  feet  high  in  a  minute ;  and 673*47  cubic  feet  of  water  x  62*5  pounds,  the  weight  per foot  X  132  feet  in  height  =  5,556,127,  which  divided  by 33,000,  gives  168^,  say  168  horses'  power.  The  pressure upon  the  piston  from  a  column  of  water,  132  feet  high, reckoning  27  inches  of  water  equal  to  a  pound,  is  about 68  pounds  on  the  square  inch,  or  rather  more  than  50  tons' pressure  on  the  area  of  the  piston.  Thus  the  area  of  the piston,  50  inches  in  diameter,  is  1963  square  inches  x  58 pounds  =  113,854 :  and  this  divided  by  2240,  the  number  of pounds  in  a  ton,  gives  50*8,  say  50  tons.
There  are  five  other  pressure-engines  at  these  mines  of smaller  size.
This  engine  was  erected  early  in  1842,  and  is  now working.  It  was  at  work,  without  intermission,  for  six years ;  and  on  one  occasion,  when  the  author  made  inquiry as  to  its  performance,  the  answer  was,  that  it  had  been constantly  goiQg  for  the  last  seventeen  weeks,  and  nobody had  seen  it  during  the  time.
An  excellent  working  model  of  this  engiue  will  be  found in  the  Museum  of  Practical  Geology  in  Jermyn-street, London,  an  institution  which  ought  to  be  visited  by  all persons  who  are  interested  in  mining  and  metallurgy,  and  in the  employment  of  mineral  wealth  for  all  purposes  of practical  utility  and  decorative  ornament,  as  well  as  by geologists.  The  model  was  made  by  Mr.  Jordan,  since  so well  known  by  his  invention  for  carving  wood  and  stone  by machinery,  and  thus  copying  works  of  art.
It  will  be  observed  that  after  the  large  valves  are  closed, the  pressure  is  continued  upon  the  piston  to  complete  the stroke.  This  was  at  first  done  by  means  of  cocks ;  but  as the  friction  of  these  caused  some  little  trouble,  Mr.  Dar- lington substituted  some  small  pistons  to  shut  off  the  water at  the  termination  of  the  stroke.
Mr.  Taylor  has  since  had  another  engine  of  the  same  size made  for  a  lead  mine  in  Wales,  and  the  results  have  been equally  satisfactory.
In  these  machines,  as  in  aU  others  where  the  water  acts by  its  gravity  or  pressure,  the  best  results  are  obtained where  the  water  enters  them  without  shock  or  impulse,  and
F  3
106  MR.  Armstrong's  engine.
quits  them  without  velobity.  We  then  realise  all  the available  power  the  water  will  yield,  with  the  least  loss  of effect ;  and  the  duty  is  best  performed  by  making  the  pipes and  passages  of  sufficient  and  ample  size  to  prevent  accele- ration of  the  hydrostatic  column.
The  cranes  worked  by  water-pressure,  constructed  by- Mr.  William  G^eorge  Armstrong,  of  Newcastle-on-Tyne, have  been  described  in  another  book,  on  Orcmes  and  Hoistmg Machinery,  wntten  by  the  author  of  this  work.
These  hydraulic  cranes  are  characterised  by  their  great steadiness  and  precision  of  movement.  By  means  of  the regulating  handles,  their  motions,  both  in  lifting  and lowering,  as  well  as  in  turning,  are -graduated  with  perfect accuracy ;  and,  practically  speaking,  the  speed  with  which they  may  be  worked  has  no  other  limit  than  that  imposed by  the  size  of  the  supply  pipe.
The  author  has  the  satisfaction  to  state  that  since  the treatise  on  cranes  was  published,  many  of  those  worked  by water-pressure  have  been  erected,  in  and  about  London, — particularly  in  the  collier  basin  of  the  West  India  Docks, where  they  are  used  to  discharge  the  cargoes  of  the  ships, and  at  the  Great  Western  Railway  goods  station.  They are  also  to  be  used  at  the  Great  Northern  and  the  Camden Town  goods  stations.
Hydraulic  pressure  admits  of  very  extensive  and  useful application  in  mercantile  docks,  not  only  to  cranes  for lifting  heavy  weights,  but  also  for  "  whipping  '*  light  goods from  ships,  and  for  opening  and  shutting  dock-gates,  swing- bridges,  and  sluices.
The  facility  with  which  water  may  be  conveyed  to  the places  where  the  power  is  wanted,  the  ease  with  which it  may  be  managed,  its  perfect  safety,  and  its  constant readiness  for  action,  render  it  eminently  suitable  for  these purposes.
When  hydraidic  engines  are  extensively  used  and  sys- tematically employed,  it  may  be  prudent  to  apply  steam power  to  raise  the  water  to  an  elevated  tank,  not  less  than 100  feet  above  their  level,  for  that  is  in  reality  only  another mode  of  using  steam  power,  the  water  being  the  vehicle  for its  transmission.  But  there  are  many  places  where  th« supply  may  with  advantage  be  obtained  from  the  public water- works,  and  even  when  the  water  pressure  may  be  used in  trcmsitu,  without  using  the  water.  This  is  now  actually done  in  Newcastle-on-Tyne,  where  an  improved  pressure-
THE  NEWCASTLE  CHEONICLB,
107
engine,  made  by  Mr.  Armstrong,  is  used  to  print  the  New- castle  Chronicle,  one  of  the  most  extensively  circulated provincial  newspapers.  The  author  ha^  the  pleasure  of seeing  it  in  full  work.  The  town  is  placed  on  the  side  of  a high  and  steep  hill,  and  the  printing-office  is  about  half-way up,  so  that  the  water  merely  passes  through  the  engine  ana goes  on  to  aid  the  supply  for  the  lower  parts  of  the  town.
Fig.  37.
BLBTATION.
In  many  parts  of  London  water  is  supplied,  in  quantity, at  4id,  for  1000  gallons,  at  a  pressure  of  160  feet ;  and there  are  many  trades  that  require  occasionally  to  use mechanical  power,  but  cannot  employ  a  steam  engine,  for they  do  not  want  the  power  constantly,  and  they  do  not want  much  power  at  any  time.
108  THE   WATEE-PRESSXJRB  ENGINE.
If  the  supply-pipe,  conveying  the  water  from  the  main into  the  workshop  be  of  sufficient  size,  a  small  pressure- engine  may  at  any  time  be  set  in  motion,  without  risk  of fire,  and  without  requiring  any  skill  in  management,  by  the mere  turning  of  a  tap ;  and  the  turner,  cutler,  optician,  or other  artificer,  may  have  auxiliary  power  whenever  it  suits him  to  use  it, — the  engine  being  also  a  perfect  water  meter, when  a  coimter  is  attached  to  it,  showing  the  number  of revolutions  it  has  made,  and  the  quantity  of  water  passing through  it.  A  gallon  of  water  weighs  101b.,  so  that 1000  gallons  of  water  falling  150  feet  are  equal  to 1,500,000  lb.  falling  one  foot;  and,  if  1500  gallons  of water  be  used  in  one  hour,  they  are  equal  to  37,500  lb. falling  one  foot  in  a  minute,  or  somewhat  more  than  a horse's  power,  which  is  33,000;  therefore,  allowing  the difference  for  loss  at  the  escape-valves,  it  may  be  assumed that  the  cost  of  a  horse's  power  for  one  hour  will  be  6d, where  the  water  runs  to  waste.
The  engine  which  prints  the  Newcastle  Chronicle  has  two cylinders,  each  3f  inches  in  diameter,  or  8*9461  square inches  area  on  their  pistons ;  but  the  piston-rods  are  each one  inch  in  diameter,  and  their  area,  -7854  x  2,  must  be deducted,  leaving  the  area  of  the  four  sides  of  tl\e  pistons, less  that  of  the  rods,  34*2136  inches.  The  length  of  stroke is  7  inches,  and  the  engine  makes  from  55  to  60  revolutions per  minute,  so  that,  taking  the  gallon  of  water  to  be  277*25 cubic  inches,  the  total  quantity  of  water  used  in  one  hour  to work  this  engine  is  from  2850  to  3110,  say  3000,  gallons per  hour.  But  in  this  case  it  is  the  pressure  alone  that  is used,  and  not  the  water.  The  whole  head  of  water  is 430  feet,  and  of  this  column  200  feet  are  above  the  engine, and  230  feet  below  it.  This  difference  of  200  feet,  allowing 27  inches  of  head  to  give  one  pound  pressure,  is  equal  to 88  poimds  on  each  square  inch  of  the  pistons.  The  stroke being  7  inches,  a  speed  of  60  revolutions  is  equal  to 420  inches,  or  35  feet,  per  minute  ;  so  that,  multiplying  the area  34*2  inches  x  88  lb.  x  35  feet  per  minute,  the  pro- duct is  105,336  lb.  falling  one  foot  in  a  minute,  which,  being divided  by  33,000,  gives  319,  or  ftdl  three  horses  power.
Mr.  Armstrong  has  made  a  water-pressure  engine  for  an underground  inclined  plane  in  South  Hetton  Colliery.  It has  four  cylinders,  each  only  3  inches  in  diameter,  and 12  inches  stroke.  It  usually  works  at  about  100  revolutions per  minute,  and  it  is  quite  free  from  concussion  at  this  high
THE   WATBR-PBESSUEB  ENGINE.  109
speed.  The  column  of  water  acting  upon  it  is  600  feet,  and the  diameter  of  the  supply-pipe  is  4  inches.  The  engine  is placed  about  300  yards  from  the  bottom  of  the  shaft  at  the head  of  the  inclined  plane,  880  yards  long,  of  an  irregular acclivity,  but  in  the  steepest  parts  the  rise  is  1  in  18.  Up this  incline  the  engine  hauls  20  loaded  wagons,  weighing  col- lectively 16  tons.  Each  run  is  accomplished  in  six  minutes, and  the  quantity  of  water  expended  in  that  time  is  1500 gallons.  This  engine  will  eventually  be  required  to  draw 40  trains  per  day,  in  which  case  the  quantity  of  water expended  will  be  equivalent  to  a  constant  feeder  of  42  gallons per  minute.  The  greater  part  of  the  water  used  by  this engine  drains  out  from  the  upper  part  of  the  shaft,  and before  the  engine  was  erected  it  was  permitted  to  fall  to  the bottom,  but  it  is  now  collected  in  a  standage,  which  forms a  reservoir  for  the  supply  of  the  engine ;  and  when  it  is required  to  draw  forty  trains  per  day,  the  increase  of  pump- ing to  be  done  by  the  great  lifting  engine  which  drains  the mine  will  not  exceed  20  gallons  per  minute  during  the twenty-four  hours.  The  work  done  by  this  engine  appears to  be  from  30  to  35  horse  power.
Another  engine,  with  four  cylinders,  is  now  in  use  for winding  up  ore,  &c.,  from  a  lead-mine  at  Allenheads.  The cylinders  are  6  inches  in  diameter,  with  a  stroke  of  18  inches  ; the  column  of  water  acting  upon  it  is  about  230  feet  in height,  and  the  expended  water  escapes  from  the  mine  by  a level ;  it  commonly  makes  about  60  revolutions  per  minute, and  then  it  raises  a  load  varying  from  7  to  10  cwt.,  exclusive of  the  unbalanced  weight  of  the  rope,  at  the  rate  of  900  feet per  minute.  The  engine  is  provided  with  spur  gear,  for pumping,  which  can  be  thrown  into  action  when  the  rope- drums  are  not  in  use.
Mr.  Armstrong  has  taken  a  patent  for  improvements on  the  water-pressure  engine,  the  principal  of  which  consists in  an  ingeniously-contrived  arrangement  of  escape  or  relief valves,  to  prevent  concussion  of  the  descending  column  at the  turn  of  the  piston's  stroke.  His  usual  plan  is  to  fix  the cylinders  in  an  inclined  position,  like  Sir  Mark  Brunei's Thames  Tunnel  Engines,  at  an  angle  of  90  degrees  with  each other,  so  that  the  two  may  act  upon  one  crank.
The  engravings  show  the  general  form ;  and  the  sections, kindly  given  to  the  author  by  Mr.  Armstrong,  show  the mode  of  applying  the  relief-valves.  (See  Engravings.)  By using  three  cylinders  and  dividing  the  circle  by  three  cranks
s(r:=^...
TBANSVBBSE  SECTION.
Side  View  of  Slide  Valves.  Section  through  A  B.
RRLIBP  VALVES.
THE   LIFT  AT  OSMASTON  MANOR.  Ill
iato  equal  parts  of  120  degrees,  the  motion  would  be  rendered almost  perfectly  uniform,  and  the  turn  of  stroke  would  be hardly  perceptible.
There  is  another  mode  of  applying  the  pressure  of  water as  a  motive  power,  which  is  exceedingly  useful  and  convenient. The  lift  or  hoist  employed  in  cotton-miUs  and  other  manu* factories,  to  convey  persons  from  one  floor  to  another,  or  from the  bottom  of  the  building  to  the  top,  without  the  fatigue  of ascending  the  stairs,  is  generally  known,  and  its  utility  well understood.  By  pulling  a  cord  attached  to  the  hoisting  appa- ratus, it  is  immediately  connected  with  the  machinery  of  the mill,  and  the  occupants  of  this  ascending-room  are  carried up  to  any  floor  they  please,  together  with  such  materials  as they  have  occasion  to  take  up ;  or  by  reversing  the  motion, are  lowered  to  any  story  where  they  wish  to  land.
Such  a  lift  would  be  a  valuable  audition  to  the  convenience and  comfort  of  many  a  lofty  house  in  London,  and  save  many a  weary  climbing  from  the  basement  to  the  upper  rooms. Often  has  the  wish  been  expressed,  that  some  such  contri- vance might  be  adopted,  but  the  want  of  motive  power  was a  prohibition.
It  occurred  to  Mr.  Francis  Wright,  when  he  was  building his  mansion  of  Osmaston  Manor,  near  Derby,  that  other arrangements  for  a  lift  might  be  made,  and  he  found  at  the Butterley  works  the  requisite  mechanical  skill  to  carry  his ideas  into  practice.
At  a  convenient  height  above  the  manor  was  a  reservoir of  some  extent,  which  was  constantly  replenished  by  means of  a  water-wheel  in  the  park  working  a  set  of  pumps,  so  that a  supply  of  water  at  considerable  pressure  was  always available.
A  cylinder  of  cast-iron,  about  46  feet  long,  was  made  in convenient  lengths,  and  truly  bored  to  an  internal  diameter of  11  inches :  into  this  a  piston  was  fitted  and  made  water- tight by  a  leather  collar,  such  as  is  used  in  the  hydraulic press.  The  cylinder  was  sunk  in  the  ground,  and  set accurately  upright  in  the  basement  of  the  house,  and  the stem  of  the  piston  carried  a  platform  or  landing,  with  suit- able railing  and  other  appliances.
A  pipe  leading  down  from  the  reservoir,  conveys  the water  into  the  cylinder,  below  the  piston,  which  forces  it  up with  the  platform  and  the  persons  upon  it,  until  the  ascent is  stopped  by  shutting  off  the  water ;  then,  by  allowing  the water  to  escape  from  the  cylinder,  the  piston  and  plafiorm
ll:i  THE   WATER-UAM.
descend  by  their  own  weight  until  the  escape  of  the  water is  prevented,  or  until  the  piston  reaches  the  bottom  of  the cylinder.
The  ascent  required  at  Osmaston  Manor  is  43^  feet ;  four persons  are  carried  up  in  two  minutes  to  the  full  height, and  as  the  platform  cannot  rise  or  fall  faster  than  the  water enters  or  escapes,  there  is  no  risk  jfrom  acceleration  either way,  because  the  size  of  the  water-way  determines  the maximum  speed  of  the  piston,  which  is  also  regulated  by  the opening  given  to  the  valve.
The  apparatus  has  been  in  action  about  four  years,  and  has answered  its  purpose  well.  A  similar  machine,  with  a shorter  lift,  is  used  to  raise  the  provisions  from  the  kitchen to  the  level  of  the  dining-room.
Assuming  the  elevation  of  the  pond  or  reservoir  to  be  130 feet  above  the  cylinder  bottom  (which  is  about  the  height), the  pressure  against  the  piston  at  the  commencement  of  the lift  will  be  about  58  lb.  on  the  square  inch,  and  when  it  has risen  to  the  full  height  of  43  J  feet,  the  pressure  will  be  about 43  lb.  on  the  square  inch,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  lift.  The area  of  a  piston  11  inches  in  diameter,  being  about  95  square inches,  a  pressure  of  58  lb.  gives  a  force  of  48  cwt.,  and  a pressure  of  43  lb.  gives  a  force  of  36  cwt.,  which  is  found suflS-cient  to  overcome  the  friction,  resistance,  and  weight  of the  machinery,  and  to  raise  the  requisite  loads,  carrying  up half-a-ton  in  about  four  minutes.
A  like  application  of  water-power  may  be  advanta- geously made  in  many  places,  at  wharfs,  warehouses,  railway stations,  and  docks,  especially  where  hydraulic  pressure  is already  provided  to  work  the  water-cranes,  and  where  the weight  of  the  platform  and  piston  may  be  counterbalanced.
THE  WATER-EAM.
In  treating  of  water-pressure  engines,  it  is  remarked  that care  must  be  taken  to  prevent  any  sudden  check  being  given to  the  descending  column,  and  that  relief  or  escape  valves, air-vessels,  weighted  plungers,  or  some  means  of  lessening the  momentum  of  the  water,  are  requisite  to  guard  against the  shocks  which  the  machine  must  sustain  if  the  motion  of the  water  be  impeded :  this  momentum,  however,  may  be rendered  exceedingly  useful  as  a  moving  power,  by  which a  portion  of  the  water  may  be  raised  to  a  higher  level  by means  of  the  hydraulic  ram,  to  be  used  for  manufacturing '^nd  domestic  purposes,  or  for  watering  land  above  the  level
the  stream.
THE  WATER-RAM.  113
The  water-ram,  although  it  often  figures  in  books  on
hydraulics,  is  less  used  than  it  ought  to  be:    the  reader
.   generally  regards  it  as  a  curious,  old-fashioned  device,  and
,   thinks  no  more  of  it ;  but  for  simplicity,  cheapness,  and  useful
effect  combined,  few  machines  are  superior.
The  merit  of  first  employing  the  momentum  of  water  to raise  a  portion  of  itself  to  a  higher  level  is  due  to  Mr.  John '  "Whitehurst,  who,  in  k  letter  addressed  to  the  Royal  Society, in  1776,  and  printed  in  their  Transactions,  explains  the principles  of  its  action,  and  the  mode  of  applying  them,  he had  then  successfully  adopted.
M.  Montgolfier,  who  does  not  appear  to  have  known  any anything  of  this  communication,  afterwards  invented  a  similar machine  in  France,  and  gave  it  the  name  it  still  bears,  "  Le B^lier  Hydraulique,"  from  the  butting  action  of  the  water ; and  Messrs.  Boulton  &  Watt,  with  his  permission,  took  a patent  for  it  in  England,  dated  December  13,  1797.
About  twenty  years  later,  the  son  of  M.  Montgolfier  took an  English  patent  for  some  improvements  in  his  father's arrangements ;  and  the  visitors  of  the  Great  Exhibition  of 1861  will  remember  two  modifications  of  the  hydraulic ram  by  London  makers,  Mr.  Freeman  Eoe  and  Messrs. Easton  &  Amos.
The  first  machines  made  on  the  plan  of  the  elder  M.  Mont- golfier, by  Messrs.  Boulton  &  Watt,  were  exceedingly simple  in  their  construction  and  arrangement,  and  yet  very- effective.  A  horizontal  pipe,  with  a  trumpet-shaped  mouth to  admit  the  water  freely,  was  either  inserted  into  the  side of  a  supply-tank  into  which  the  stream  flowed,  and  kept  it full,  or  it  passed  through  the  dam  into  a  reservoir  that could  be  maintained  at  a  uniform  height.  At  the  end  of this  pipe  was  a  weighted  valve,  opening  inwards,  and  upon the  top  of  the  pipe,  near  the  end,  was  an  air  vessel,  the capacity  of  it  being  at  least  equal  to  ten  times  the  quantity of  water  to  be  raised  at  each  stroke,  and  larger  as  the  lift incre^ed.  At  the  bottom  of  the  air-vessel  was  a  valve, opening  upwards,  to  admit  the  water  into  the  air-vessel,  and prevent  its  return,  and  to  the  air-vessel  was  attached  the ascending-pipe,  carrying  up  the  water,  raised  to  a  higher level  by  the  action  of  the  machine.
The  water  being  allowed  to  flow  through  the  horizontal pipe,  soon  acquired  velocity  and  force,  and  suddenly  shut  the valve  at  the  end  of  the  pipe  ;  the  momentum  of  the  water,thus checked,  lifted  the  valve  in  the  air-vessel,  forcing  through
114  THE  WATER-RAM.
it  a  portion  of  the  water,  compressing  the  air  witbin,  and thus  raising  the  water  part  way  up  the  ascending  pipe.
The  force  having  been  expended  and  the  water  brought to  a  state  of  rest,  the  weight-valve  at  the  pipe  end  opened again;  the  descending  column  flowed  through  until  its velocity  again  overcame  the  weight  on  the  valve  and  forcibly shut  it:  thus,  by  repeated  strokes,  was  the  water  raised to  the  top  of  the  ascending  pipe,  and  then  eVery  stroke discharged  a  volume  of  water  inversely  proportioned  to  the height.
The  pipe  conveying  the  descending  water  may  be  placed in  an  inclined  position,  instead  of  being  laid  horizontally ; it  is  sometimes  called  the  body  of  the  ram,  and  the  air-vessel and  valves  the  head.  M.  Montgolfier  considered,  that with  a  well-constructed  machine  he  might  obtain  75  per cent,  of  useful  effect ;  but  the  following  were  the  results of  experiment:
The  fall  of  water  was  3  feet  4  inches,  the  pipe,  or  body  of the  ram,  8  inches  in  diameter,  and  the  height  to  which  the water  was  raised,  15  feet  1  inch.  The  machine  made  100 strokes  in  three  minutes,  expending  in  that  time  67  cubic feet  of  water,  and  lifting  9i  feet.     Thus  67  x  3'33  =  223*11,
and  9-25 X 15083  =  189-517.      Then  ^^  =  ^,  or  62
per  cent,  of  the  power  employed.
The  improvements  of  the  younger  M.  Montgolfier  con- sisted chiefly  of  the  introduction  of  a  ''smiting  valve," admitting  a  small  quantity  of  air  to  make  up  the  loss  caused by  absorption  from  the  air-vessel  by  the  ascending  water, and  of  a  contrivance  to  retain  a  "cushion  or  mattress  of  air*' about  the  seat  of  the  stop-valve,  in  order  to  lessen  the concussion.  (See  Section,  Fig.  39.)  The  following  table shows  the  results  obtained  by  French  engineers.
The  first  column  shows  the  head  or  fall  of  water  acting  on the  machine ;  the  second,  the  quantity  expended.  The  third shows  the  height  to  which  the  water  was  raised;  ani  the fourth  the  quantity  raised  to  that  height.  The  fifth  column shows  the  useful  effect  in  each  case.
Fall  in  feet
Expended.
Elevation.
Raised.
Effects.
8-53
2-405
52-69  ft.
•2207
.565
27-30
5-951
195-02
•6189
.543
84-77
2-971
111-88
•6013
.651
3-21
70-282
14-92
9-5147
.629
22-96
•459
196-86
•0343
.640
THE  WATER-RAM.  115
The  quantities  of  water  expended  and  raised  are  reduced to  cubic  feet,  and  the  mean  of  useful  effect  is  "605,  or  say six-tenths  of  the  power  expended :  experiments  also  show that  it  can  do  good  duty  where  it  raises  water  seven  times the  height  of  the  faU.  Practically,  perhaps  one-half  of  the power  expended,  or  50  per  cent,  of  useful  effect  will  be  the amount  realised ;  for  it  must  be  expected  that  in  aU  these experiments,  the  machines  were  in  good  order ;  yet  there  are many  localities  where  a  water-ram  may  be  used  with  great benefit,  as  it  steadily  and  constantly  performs  its  task with  very  little  care  on  the  part  of  its  owner,  except  to  see that  the  water  is  strained  through  a  grating,  to  keep  back extraneous  substances,  and  that  the  apparatus  is  protected or  emptied  during  a  hard  frost.  The  first  example  mentioned raised  9i  cubic  feet,  or  57*8  gallons  in  three  minutes, amounting  to  27,750  gallons  in  twenty-four  hours,  to  a height  of  11  feet  9  inches  above  the  pond  that  supplied  the water;  and  this  without  labour  or  expense,  beyond  the interest  of  its  cost.
It  is  true  that  the  heavy  blow  or  shock,  given  by  the momentum  of  the  descending  column,  has  hitherto  limited the  size  of  this  apparatus ;  but  this  shock  may  be  lessened by  increasing  the  number  anji  improving  the  form  of  valves and  pipes ;  and  the  principle  may  probably  be  still  frirther developed  in  the  hands  of  skilful  mechanics,  as  it  has  been successfully  done  in  the  pressure-engine.
After  the  foregoing  passages  had  been  written,  the author  was  favoured  with  a  letter  and  drawing  from  Messrs. Easton  '&  Amos,  of  Great  Guildford-street,  Southwark,  who exhibited  one  of  their  machines  at  the  Crystal  Palace; the  drawing  showing  their  mode  of  fixing  it,  to  supply  water to  a  mansion  in  the  country.
They  have  made  some  improvements,  for  which  they  have taken  a  patent ;  and  they  state  they  can  obtain  a  mechanical effect  of  65  or  70  per  cent. ;  that  the  lowest  available  fall  is 2  feet,  and  the  highest  35  to  40  feet ;  the  quantity  of  water they  lift  varies  with  the  size  of  the  ram  and  height  of  the lift  from  half  a  gallon  to  6  gallons  per  minute.
The  greatest  height  to  which  they  have  raised  the  water, by  a  machine  which  has  been  at  work  some  years,  is  330  feet. They  lay  the  ^Hnjection  pipe,^^  or  body  of  the  ram,  at  an inclination  varying  from  one  in  eighteen  for  small  falls  to one  in  four  for  high  falls.  Having  formed  a  dam  across  the stream,  they  take  the  water  by  an  earthenware  conduit-pipe
116
THE   WATER-RAM.
Fig.  39
WATER-POWER  TO   GRIND   CORN.  117
into  a  covered  tank  of  brick-work  ;  this  receives  the  mouth of  the  inclined  cast-iron  pipe,  which  is  opened  or  closed  at pleasure  by  a  flap  valve  ;  the  pipe  is  laid  in  the  ground  below the  reach  of  the  frost,  and  the  apparatus  is  fixed  in  a  circular and  domed  vault  of  brick-work,  which  protects  it  from freezing ;  and  from  which  the  water  that  works  the  ram  is conveyed  by  a  covered  channel  to  some  convenient  point where  it  may  rejoin  the  stream  at  a  lower  level.  The  ram  is secured  to  a  stout  piece  of  oak  or  elm  timber  built  into  the brick-work.     (Fig.  39.)
To  enable  them  to  make  a  correct  estimate  of  the  size, capability,  and  cost  of  these  machiaes,  they  require  to  know, —
1st.  The  number  of  feet  fall  to  be  obtained  at  the  spring or  brook  to  work  the  ram.
2nd.  The  perpendicular  height  from  the  lower  part  of  the fall  to  the  point  where  the  water  must  be  delivered.
3rd.  The  horizontal  distance  from  the  place  of  supply  to the  place  where  the  water  is  wanted;  and  if  the  spring or  stream  be  small,  it  is  desirable  to  ascertain  how  many gallons  it  flows  per  minute.
CHAPTEE  XII.
THE  APPLICATION  OP  WATER  POWER  TO  GRIND  CORN.- THE PROGRESS  OF  CORN-MILLS,  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THEIR MACHINERY.
In  applying  water  power  to  grind  com,  the  usual  mode of  computing  the  mill's  capability  is  to  ascertain  the  height and  volume  of  the  fall,  and  thence  the  available  force,  ex- pressed in  horses'  power ;  and  the  wheel  is  so  proportioned that  when  driven  at  the  rate  determined,  the  buckets  may be  about  two-thirds  filled  by  the  average  supply  of  water ; in  order  to  avoid  waste  at  ordinary  times,  and  also  that during  the  excess  in  floods,  an  additional  load  in  the  buckets may  compensate  for  the  resistance  of  tail  water.
It  has  been  shown  in  the  preceding  pages  that  12  cubic feet  of  water  per  second,  or  750  pounds  weight,  are  equal to  an  available  horse's  power,  for  each  foot  in  height  of  their fall  when  acting  by  gravity  on  a  well-constructed  water wheel ;  that  is  to  say,  the  useM  mechanical  effect  is  73  per
118  :WATER-POWER  TO   GBIND   CORN.
cent.  Mr.  Eennie  in  some  cases  obtained  80  per  cent. ;  and few  wheels  and  mills,  executed  with  ordiaary  care  and  skill, realise  less  than  two-thirds,  or  66  per  cent,  of  the  water- fall's power.
As  the  force  required  to  drive  machiaery  of  aU  kinds  is now  generally  expressed  ia  horses'  power,  except  it  be  imme- diately applied  to  work  pumps,  -it  has  not  of  late  been thought  necessary  to  make  direct  experiments  to  show  tlie weight  of  water  required  to  drive  modern  mills ;  their  owners are  satisfied  to  know,  or  to  assume,  that  they  do  their work  with  a  given  number  of  horses*  power  of  the  usual standard ;  namely,  33,000  pounds  raised  one  foot  high  in  a minute.
Consequently  there  are  few  recorded  trials  worth  notice, since  those  of  Mr.  Thomas  Tenwick,  who  found  that  300 pounds  of  water  falling  210  feet  in  a  miaute,  would  grind one  boll  (or  two  bushels)  of  com  in  an  hour. — lie  says — "  The  quantity  of  water  expended  on  the  wheel  was  measured with  great  exactness  ;  the  com  used  was  in  a  medium  state of  dryness ;  the  mills  in  aU  their  parts  were  in  a  medium working  state,  the  mill-stones,  making  from  90  to  100  revo- lutions per  miaute,  were  from  4^  to  6  feet  ia  diameter."
Therefore  it  took   =  31,500,  or  very  nearly  a
2
horse's  power  to  grind  a  bushel  of  com.    *
To  ascertain  the  friction  of  a  mill  when  goiag  with  velocity sufficient  to  grind  two  bolls  of  com  (or  four  bushels)  per hour,  he  made  a  series  of  experiments  in  the  following manner : — "  The  mill  was  made  quite  clear  of  com,  and  the upper  miQ-stone  raised,  so  that  it  would  touch  as  little  as possible  on  the  under  stone,  in  its  revolutions,  then  such  a quantity  of  water  was  admitted  to  flow  on  the  water  wheel, (an  overshot  wheel)  as  to  give  the  null,  when  empty,  the same  velocity  it  had  when  grinding  com  at  the  rate  of  two bolls  per  hour,  which  quantity  of  water  was  sufficient  to raise  a  load  of  300  pounds  with  a  velocity  of  100  feet  per minute."
This  he  therefore  considered  as  the  measure  of  the friction,  and  concluded,  that  as  the  power  requisite  to grind  two  bolls  of  com  per  hour,  including  the  friction, of  the  .mOl,  was  equal  to  that  which  can  raise  a  weight of  300  pounds  with  a  velocity  of  350  feet  per  minute,  the difference  of  the  two  which  is  300  pounds  raised  with the  velocity  of  250  feet  per  minute,  is  equal  to  the  power
WATER-POWER  TO   GRIND   CORN.
119
employed  in  the  actual  grinding  of  the  com.  This  gives  a proportion  of  '714  to  1,  or  somewhat  over  71  per  cent,  of useful  effect.
Mr.  Fenwick,  who  was  of  an  ancient  family  in  Northumber- land, was  by  profession  a  "  colliery  viewer ; "  he  had  a high  reputation  for  mechanical  and  engineering  skiU,  and was  hving  in  the  schooldays  of  the  author ;  he  wrote  several works  on  practical  mechanics  and  mining,  which  were  at that  time  esteemed  as  good  authority  and  went  through several  editions.
He  does  not  state  what  kind  of  mill-stones  were  employed, but  probably  they  were  the  "  Dutch  blue  stones  "  then  in use,  a  kind  of  lava  rock,  wrought  chiefly  in  the  German quarries  near  Andemach  and  Coblentz,  brought  down  the Ehine  and  shipped  to  this  country  from  Holland.  They  had superseded  the  mill-stone  grit  or  "grey  stones"  as  they also  have  since  been  displaced  hj  the  "  French  biur  stones," now  generally  employed  in  grinding  wheat.  The  blue  stones are  but  little  used,  and  the  grey  stones  are  seldom  seen,
Fig.  40.
Fig.  41.
The  fixed  cross  or  rjnd.
The  bridge  rynd.
except  in  the  north  for  grinding  oatmeal,  rye,  or  barley- meal.     These  blue  stones  were  each  in  one  piece,  and  were
120  WATER-POWER  TO   GRIND   CORN.
then  dressed  slightly  conical  on  the  face,  the  lower  mill- stone being  convex  about  three  quarters  of  an  inch,  and  the upper  stone  about  an  inch  concave.  The  upper  end  of  the spindle  was  square,  and  upon  it  was  fixed  a  wrought-iron  cross or  rynd,  which  was  let  into  the  upper  millstone,  so  that  great exactness  was  requisite  to  make  the  stone  true  to  the  spindle. (See  rig.  40.)  Afterwards  a  pivot  or  centre-point,  tipped  with steel,  was  formed  on  the  top  of  the  spindle  above  the  square, and  projected  up  into  the  eye  of  the  upper  stone  for  about half  its  thickness ;  a  bridge  of  iron  was  let  into  the  stone and  rested  upon  the  point  of  the  spindle,  a  cavity  being formed  to  receive  it,  and  the  upper  stone  was  balanced  upon the  spindle  point,  at  or  about  its  centre  of  gravity  ;  a  driver was  fitted  on  the  square  with  two  claws  at  each  end  loosely clipping  the  bridge ;  the  stone  vibrated  freely  like  a  compass card,  resting  on  the  bridged  rynd  and  turned  by  the  driver, so  that  when  the  stone  was  set  in  rapid  motion  the  centri- fugal force  caused  it  to  revolve  in  a  level  plane,  and  neutra- lised any  little  inequality  in  the  balancing.     (See  Fig.  41.)
Then  it  was  found  better  to  dress  the  stones  to  a  level face  instead  of  making  them  9onical,  and  the  upper  stone, thus  balanced,  spun  round  and  seemed  to  float  as  it were,  almost  in  contact  with  the  nether  stone,  but  not touching  it.
The  French  burr  stone  is  a  sharp  porous  silex  or  chert, found  chiefly  on  the  banks  of  the  Mame,  the  quarries extending  up  to  Epemay,  whence  it  is  brought  in  bateaux and  carried  down  the  Seine  for  shipment  at  Bouen  or  Havre ; it  resembles  bread  or  rather  paste  in  state  of  fermentation, changed  into  stone,  and  is  found  so  much  more  effective  for grinding  com,  that  a  small  surface  and  consequently  a  less millstone,  answers  the  purpose.  The  blue  stones  were  often six  feet  or  more  in  oiameter,  and  seldom  less  than  five, four  and  a  half  feet  being  considered  a  small  stone.  The French  stones  seldom  exceed  four  and  a  half  feet,  or  four feet  in  diameter ;  consequently  they  run  faster  and  produce flour  of  better  colour  and  quality,  as  they  do  not  retain  the com  so  long  between  them  nor  rub  down  the  bran  with the  flour.
From  the  peculiar  formation  of  the  Frenph  burr,  it  is difficult  to  get  a  whole  stone  of  uniform  quality  throughout, and  therefore  it  has  been  found  expedient  to  build  the  mill- stone of  selected  pieces  cemented  together  with  plaster  of Paris,  and  hooped  with  iron;  the  stone  is  then  finished
THE  DEESSING  OP  MILLSTONES.
121
smootli  with  cement  on  the  back,  and  dressed  to  a  true  and level  face,  the  work  or  races  are  cut  in,  which  cross  each other  when  the  miUstones  are  in  action  (see  fig.  42),  and  the face  of  the  stone  having  been  proved  with  a  paint  or  trying staff,  a  strong  ruler  of  hard  wood,  the  stone  is  sharpened  by dressing  it  all  over  the  face  with  a  broad  steel  chisel  or  bill, hatching  the  stone  in  parallel  lines  about  an  eighth  of  an  inch apart,  and  in  some  miUs  much  closer,  like  the  teeth  of  a  file.
Fig.  42.
THB  NETHEB  MILLSTONE.
To  dress  or  sharpen  the  millstones  with  the  chisel  or  bill requires  great  precision  of  eye  and  hand,  and  much  practice to  do  this  well,  when  the  work  is  close  and  fine.  Those  who took  an  interest  in  the  miU  machiner  of  France  in  the  Great Exhibition,  generally  found  an  opportunity  to  examine  and many  to  make  trial  of  a  very  ingenious  tool,  or  rather  a  piece of  mechanism,  somewhat  like  a  ruling  machine  or  dividing engine  combined  with  the  miU  chisel,  to  guide  the  hand  of the  miller  when  he  dresses  the  millstones,  and  enabling him  to  put  in  the  work,  however  minute,  in  parallel  lines  of equal  width.  The  shaft  which  holds  the  chisel  works  upon a  pivot  like  a  small  forge  hammer,  and  on  this  pivot  is  a screw  by  which  the  divisions  or  spaces  between  the  cuts  are determined  at  pleasure,  and  the  bearings  of  this  pivot  which is  about  15  inches  long  are  7^  inches  apart ;  these  slide  on two  guide  bars  and  keep  the  cuts  parallel ;  there  is  a  rest for  the  arm  of  the  miller,  who  keeps  the  chisel  going, making  the  usual  sharp  cracking  noise,  but  doing  his  work
122
VENTILATION   OF   MILLSTONES.
Fig.  43.
much  more  rapidly  and  regularly  with  the  help  of  this  imple- ment than  he  could  before,  besides  which,  it  renders  any miller  of  ordinary  skill  capable  of  doing  first-rate  work.
Lately  another  mode  of  hanging  the  millstones,  instead of  the  bridge  or  centre  rynd,  has  been  introduced :  a  pair of  '^  gymhcd  rings'^  in  a  compact  form  are  fitted  to  the spindle-head,  and  the  stone  is  suspended  in  the  same  way  as the  sea  compass,  so  that  it  vibrates  equally  on  all  sides  with- out being  checked,  even  by  the driver,  and  as  it  can  be  nearly balanced  in  this  way  it  swings round  very  steadily  when  in  full
Br  ^m  I M<8)3i I  Is  ^  further  improvement  has llli  ^^x^^SF/ ^^  ^een  attempted,  and  in  several instances  successfully,  of  making the  upper  millstones  with  hoUow backs  a^d  blowing  into  them  a current  of  air  by  means  of  a  fan blast.  Several  examples  of  this kind,  both  English  and  foreign, were  to  be  seen  in  the  Q-reat Exhibition,  with  holes  or  open- ings made  through  the  stone  in various  ways,  so  that  the  air  may pass  between  the  millstones  when grinding,  and  being  thrown  out at  the  circumference  or  skirt  of the  stone  it  expedites  the  grind- ing and  keeps  the  flour  cool.
While  so  many  inventions have  been  applied  to  the  upper millstone,  the  lower  stone  has  not  been  neglected;  long after  the  author  was  acquainted  with  mill  work,  the nether  millstone  rested  on  a  framing  of  wood,'  and  the  only means  of  making  the  face  of  it  perfectly  level  or  at  right angles  to  the  axis  of  the  spindle,  was  by  wooden  wedges  and packing — a  tedious  and  difficult  operation.  This  was obviated  by  a  cast-iron  seat  with  th^  means  of  adjustment by  set  screws,  and  latterly  a  wrought-iron  cradle  of  an equilateral  triangular  form  receives  the  nether  millstope. The  angles  being  equal,  and  a  screw  being  placed  at  each angle,  the  millstone  rests  on  three  equidistant  points,  ajid is  in  this  way  as  easily  set  as  a  spirit-level.    This  seems  a
GYMBAL  RINGS.
ADJUSTMENT   OF   MILLSTONES.  123
favourite  plan  with  the  Americans  and  the  !Prench  mill- wrights, but  although  the  three  points  must  bear  equally, many  of  the  English  mechanics  prefer  adjustment  by  four points,  by  which  they  obtain  two  level  lines  intersecting each  other.
The  stone  being  truly  levelled  on  the  fisice,  is  now  often adjusted  and  fixed  horizontally  also  by  three  or  four  screws dividing  the  pircumference ;  but  in  mauy  mills  it  is  retained by  a  strong  curb  of  wood  surrounding  the  stone,  and  rising up  within  an  inch  or  two  of  its  face.  This  curb  serves  also as  a  base  for  the  wooden  case  inclosing  the  millstone,  and through  it  the  meal  is  discharged  by  the  spout  below  into sacks  or  binns  as  may  be  most  convenient.  In  several  of the  modem  mills  the  case  is  made  of  sheet-iron,  sometimes zinked  or  galvanized,  and  the  meal  descending  by  the  spout falls  into  a  long  trough  fitted  with  an  endless  screw  of  a coarse  pitch  and  deep  thread,  sometimes  of  cast  iron,  some- times of  thin  plate  of  equal  length  with  the  trough,  revolv- ing in  it,  which  conveys  the  meal  to  some  convenient  point, whence  it  is  carried  up  into  a  higher  loft  by  means  of  an endless  belt  or  web  fitted  with  light  iron  or  tin  buckets,  and called  by  the  millers  a  "  Jacob's  ladder ;"  here  it  is  distributed as  may  be  desired  to  be  ready  for  the  dressing-machine.
The  most  conspicuous  adjuncts  of  the  millstones  were  the hopper  with  the  feeding  trunk  or  shoot,  to  bring  the  com into  the  hopper  from  the  floor  above ;  the  shoe  to  carry  it over  the  eye  of  the  miUstone  ;  the  mill  clack  or  "  damsel," to  shake  tlie  shoe  and  supplv  the  com  evenly  and  regularly from  the  hopper  to  the  mill ;  the  cord  and  peg  to  raise  or lower  the  point  of  the  shoe  and  augment  the  feed;  the wooden  spring  to  make  the  shoe  recoil;  and  the  warning bell,  to  call  the  negligent  miller  to  his  empty  hopper. Pleasant  it  was  to  see  all  this  simple,  but  ingenious  apparatus, steadily  and  quietly,  yet  with  an  appearance  of  life,  instinct, and  good  will,  cheerfully  perform  its  task  to  the  soimd  of  the merry  mill  clack.
The  hopper  and  its  attendants  are  disappearing  in  modem mills,  and  a  brass  receptacle,  vainly  attempting  to  imitate  a Boman  um,  is  superseding  the  only  machinery  which  may be  said  to  have  become  classical  and  resected ;  into  this um  the  com  descends  from  above  by  a  pipe  fitted  into  it, and  thus  the  mill-eye  is  kept  closed,  as  it  must  be,  when  an air  blast  is  used.  But  the  hopper  had  already  begun  to  lose its  traditional  form  of  an  inverted  pyramid  of  wood,  and  to
o  2
124  MODES   OF  DBIVING  MILLSTONES.
appear  as  a  funnel  of  sheet-iron,  with  which  the  old  miller haa  no  sympathy.
The  iron  apparatus  for  adjusting  and  securing  the  mill- stones, involved  an  iron  frame  and  columns  to  carry  it, instead  of  wood,  and  hence  many  mills  of  recent  date  have been  built  fire-proof.  For  such  cases  stone  foundations  and flooring  have  become  requisite,  and  the  miU-spindles,  instead of  being  stepped  upon  the  middle  of  the  foot-bridge,  a  lever of  wood  fixed  on  a  joint  at  one  end,  and  regulated  at  the other,  between  the  timber  uprights  carrying  the  millstone floor,  has  been  brought  down  to  a  cast-iron  pedestal  resting on  the  masonry,  and  containing  within  it  a  compact  combi- nation of  wheels  or  levers  and  screws,  by  whicn  the  space between  the  millstones  may  be  altered  at  pleasure.
It  has  been  proposed  to  use  annular  miUstones,  by removing  the  centrfl  part,  where  little  work  is  done,  and replacing  it  with  a  plate  of  iron  leaving  the  skirt,  or  as  it wtere  a  ring  of  stone ;  no  practical  examples  of  this  kind have  come  under  the  author's  observation,  except  so  far  as one  of  the  conical  corn-mills  partakes  of  this  character,  but this  must  be  described  separately.
There  are  three  modes  of  driving  millstones  at  present in  use.
The  first  was  suggested  by  the  use  of  the  undershot water-wheel,  which,  revolving  rapidly,  required  but  one increase  of  speed,  and  one  change  of  motion  from  the  hori- zontal shaft  to  the  vertical  spindle,  and  consequently  only one  pair  of  wheels,  namely,  the  face-wheel  or  pit-wheel  on the  water-wheel  axis,  and  the  lantern-wheel  or  trundle  on the  mill-spindle;  all  the  machinery  being  made  of  wood except  the  pivots  of  the  axle  and  the  mill-spindle.
This  simple,  but  efficient  arrangement,  may  still  be  useful in  remote  settlements,  where  neither  capital  nor  labour  are abundant.  It  was  the  usual  plan  of  a  mill  during  the greater  part  of  the  last  centuiy,  and  the  works  of  most writers  on  mechanics  and  mill-work  of  the  time  contain tables  showing  the  number  of  cogs  in  the  wheel,  and  staves or  rounds  in  the  trundle,  to  drive  a  6-foot  millstone  sixty revolutions  per  minute.  The  cogs  and  rounds  of  wood  have given  place  to  bevelled  wheels  of  cast-iron,  but  the  principle remains  the  same.  By  this  means  any  number  of  millstones may  be  placed  in  a  straight  line,  or  in  two  lines  parallel  to each  other,  each  millstone  requiring  a  pair  of  bevelled wheels,  one  of  the  wheels  (the  largest)  having  wooden  teeth.
MODES  OF  DEIVING  MILLSTONES.  125
that  they  may  work  more  smoothly  and  with  less  noise. Mr.  Smeaton  used  this  plan  for  a  line  of  millstones  in 1781.
The  second  method  came  in  with  the  overshot-wheel, which,  going  at  a  slower  rate,  required  the  speed  to  be increased  twice  between  the  water-wheel  axis  and  the  mill- stone.  So  the  pit-wheel  turned  a  bevelled  pinion  fixed  on an  upright  shaft,  which  formed  as  it  were  the  centre  of  the system ;  on  this  was  also  fixed  a  spur-wheel  of  large  diameter, say  from  6  to  10  feet,  and  round  this  were  ranged  in  a circle  the  millstones  varying  in  number  with  the  power  of the  mill,  seldom  exceeding  six  pairs,  although  small  mills  had only  two.  These  were  driven  by  the  large  spur-wheel,  by  a spur  pinion  upon  the  spindle  of  each  pair  of  stones — any- one of  which  could  be  thrown  out  of  gear  and  kept  still while  the  others  were  at  work,  by  raising  up  the  pinion upon  the  spindle  clear  of  the  spur-wheel,  and  retaining  it  in that  position  by  a  screw.  In  the  older  mills  a  pair  of  stones were  kept  at  rest  by  taking  a  couple  of  staves  out  of  the trundle.
The  third  mode  of  drivi^ig  the  millstones  is  by  belts ;  the author  first  saw  it  used  in  a  large  flour-mill  at  Attercliffe, near  Sheffield,  about  thirty-five  years  ago,  but  it  has  remained in  abeyance  until  lately,  when  it  has  made  its  appearance, and,  copied  from  the  French  mills,  it  is  again  introduced  into this  country.
The  inconvenience  attending  this  mode,  consists  in  the necessity  of  placing  the  belts  at  different  levels  when  the millstones  are  placed  round  a  vertical  driving-shaft,  and  in the  difficulty  of  disengaging  them  when  so  placed,  so  as  to set  any  one  pair  of  stones  at  rest  while  the  others  work ; and  when  a  line  or  two  lines  of  millstones  are  driven  from  a horizontal  shaft  the  belts  are  twisted  in  passing  to  the vertical  spindles,  whence  there  arises  a  number  of  practical difficulties — in  keeping  the  belt  in  its  proper  place  when  at work  and  when  at  rest,  and  also  in  keeping  it  at  a  proper tension,  so  that  the  strain  upon  the  belt  and  spindle  may  be equal,  sufficient,  and  not  in  excess.  The  advantages  are supposed  to  consist  in  the  saving  of  a  pair  of  bevelled  wheels to  each  pair  of  stones ;  but  as  there  are  three  pullevs  and  a belt  substituted  for  them,  the  economy  is  rather  aoubtful. There  must  be  one  broad  pullev  on  the  horizontal  shaft, and  two  on  the  spindle,  the  one  last  and  the  other  loose,  or vice  versd,  besides  the  requisite  apparatus  for  giving  the
126
MILLSTONES   DRIVEN   BY   BEVELLED   WHEELS.
Fig.  44.
^=Hs,i^
MILLSTONES   DBIVEN   BY   SPUR-GEAR. Fig.  46.
127
128
MILLSTONES  DEIVBN  BY   BELTS.
belt  its  proper  tension,  and  means  to  prevent  the  neck  of the  spindle  from  being  drawn  to  one  side  by  the  pull  of  the belt.
Fig.  46.
In  preparing  linseed  for  the  crushing  action  of  the  "  edge- stones,"  as  used  in  oil-mills,  it  is  found  necessary  to  bruise the  seed  between  two  rollers,  like  those  of  a  malt-mill, otherwise  this  edge-stone  would  be  much  longer  in  doing  its oflRce,  and  most  of  the  seed  would  escaj^e  without  being crushed  at  all.  Acting  on  these  observations,  the  Frenck millers  have  lately  adopted  rollers  to  bruise  their  wheat before  it  is  delivered  to  the  millstones.  The  bruised  com is  much  more  readily  converted  into  meal  than  when delivered  whole  into  the  millstones,  and  it  is  said  that  by using  these  rollers  both  time  and  money  are  saved.  Since the  Exhibition  these  rollers  have  found  their  way  into  some of  the  EngKsh  mills  ;  but  as  yet  the  precise  results  have  not been  ascertained.  In  some  of  these  machines  there  are  two pairs  of  rollers,  one  above  the  other ;  the  upper  pair  bruise the  larger  grains  of  com,  and  the  lower  pair  take  those which  pass  through  the  wider  space  above :  the  reason  for this  exactness  is,  that  the  wheat  may  only  be  bruised,  but not  broken  in  pieces,  so  that  the  skin  or  bran  may  separate easily  from  the  flour  when  under  the  millstones.
On  leaving  the  millstones  the  meal  comes  down  mixed with  the  skin  of  t^e  wheat,  some  in  flakes  as  bran,  and  some
THE  DRESSING  MILL.  129
reduced  to  smaller  particles.  It  was  often  made  into  bread in  this  state,  as  wheaten  meal ;  or  it  was  thought  sufficient to  pass  it  through  a  sieve  and  take  out  the  coarse  bran,  and when  fine  flour  was  wanted  it  was  sifted  a  second  time through  a  hair  sieve,  or  •*  holted*'  through  a  bag  of  cloth, woven  for  the  puroose,  placed  upon  a  long  reel,  and  turned rapidly  round  in  the  bolting  or  bunting  hutch.
The  sifting  was  frequently  a  domestic  operation,  per- formed bj  the  owner  of  the  meal  who  had  his  com  ground at  the  mill,  and  paid  "  a  multure  or  toll"  in  money  or  in kind ;  the  miller  who  ground  for  hire  being  prohibited  by Act  of  Parliament  from  buying  com  to  grind  for  sale.
Subsequently  woven  wire  was  used  instead  of  hair-cloth, and  the  use  of  a  brush  to  clear  the  meshes  of  the  fine  sieve, soon  introduced  the  dressmg-mill,  the  invention  of  which was  easy,  as  the  holtina-mill  was  already  in  use.
The  reel  being  fitted  with  brushes  revolved  at  a  high  speed in  a  cylindrical  frame  or  open-work  case  of  wood,  6  or 7  feet  long,  and  18  or  20  inches  diameter,  lined  with wire-cloth,  and  placed  on  an  inclined  position,  the  finest wire  at  the  upper  end,  the  size  of  the  wire  and  meshes increasing  towards  the  lower  end,  where  the  bran  was delivered.  The  cyliiMer  was  either  stationary  except  when turned  round  in  its  bearings  by  hand,  or  it  had  (as  an  im- provement) a  slow  rotary  motion,  to  bring  aU  parts  of  the circumference  to  the  top  in  succession,  to  keep  the  wires clear.  The  motion  of  the  brushes  could  be  reversed,  so  that by  revolving  in  opposite  directions  they  might  wear  equally on  both  sides,  and  the  bristles  be  prevented  from  taking  a permanent  set  in  one  direction;  adjusting  screws  were inserted  in  the  body  or  axis  of  the  reel  to  give  them  the proper  pressure  against  the  wires,  or  to  advance  the  brushes as  tney  wore  down.  The  meal  was  taken  into  the  head  of the  cylinder  by  a  "  shoe"  or  spout  of  wood  covered  with leather,  which  was  shaken  by  cams  on  the  spindle,  and  the enclosed  cylinder  rested  over  a  series  of  hoppers  to  receive the  floiu*  of  each  degree  of  fineness,  as  it  was  oriven  through the  wire-work  by  the  rapidly  revolving  brushes,  generafly eight  in  number.  Their  speed  has  been  increased  since  the author  first  examined  these  machines,  from  320  revolutions per  minute  to  450;  some  run  500,  and  even  more,  the velocitv  having  of  late  been  much  augmented,  and  the  fine- ness of  the  wire-cloth  also.  The  wire-work  at  the  upper  end of  the  cylinder  being  now  generally  No.  54,  that  is  to
G  3
130  THE   BOLTING  MILL.
say,  64  wires  in  a  lineal  inch,  or  54  x  54,  say  2,91$ meshes  in  a  square  inch,  woven  with  wire  of  34  gauge ; some  machines  have  wire-cloth  as  fine  as  No.  84,  woven with  wire  of  38  gauge,  or  84  wires  in  the  inch,  making 7,056  meshes  in  a  square  inch ;  and  the  Lincobi  millers  have used  wire  cloth  so  fine  as  No.  92.  As  the  wire  occupies  two- fifths  of  the  space,  the  aperture  of  the  mesh  is  very minute,  and  the  flour  dressed  through  it  exceedingly fine,  but  wire  cloth  so  fine  as  this  is  not  often  used.  The  wire- work  becomes  coarser  towards  the  lower  end  of  the  cylinder where  the  bran  passes  off;
»  The  partitions  dividing  the  hoppers  were  made  moveable on  hinges  at  the  bottom,  so  that  their  mouths  might  be widened  or  contracted  iu  proportion  to  each  other,  and  more or  less  fine  flour  be  taken  out  of  the  meal,  or  thrown  into the  next  quality  as  the  customer  might  desire.
The  dressing-mill  had  now  reached  its  climax,  so  1^  as principle  is  concerned,  although  many  improvements  in detail  afterwards  took  place ;  as,  for  instance,  the  substitu- tion of  iron  for  wood,  m  the  case  or  firame  of  the  cylinder, and  the  size  and  inclination  of  the  cylinder  itself,  which  has been  increased  from  20°  to  46°,  as  the  speed  has  been increased,  so  as  to  dress  the  flour  more  quickly ;  for  the sooner  this  operation  can  be  completely  performed  the better  is  the  flour.  The  application  of  external  brushes has  been  introduced  to  prevent  the  wires  from  clogging,  and it  is  found  to  act  beneficially.  Attempts  have  been  made (some  of  them  with  satisfactory  results)  to  place  the dressing-mill  quite  perpendicular ;  but  the  flour  falls  to  the bottom  as  soon  as  the  centrifugal  force  ceases,  unless  pre- vented by  means  of  shelves  or  partitions,  while  the  inclined cylinder  better  admits  of  the  convenient  arrangement  of hoppers  for  varying  the  quality  or  fineness  of  the  flour,  so that  there  does  not  appear  to  be  much  advantage  gained  by carrying  the  cylinder's  inclination  beyond  45°.
Of  late,  however,  the  bolting-mill  is  again  coming  into favour.  Many  improvements  have  been  made  in  the  manu- facture of  bolting-cloths,  which  are  now  woven  without  a seam,  and  the  French  millers  having  substituted  silk  for woollen  fabrics  to  dress  their  flour,  the  English  millers  have also  adopted  them  in  many  instances.
It  was  not  one  of  the  least  benefits  conferred  on  this country  by  the  Great  Exhibition,  that  it  settled  the  question with  respect  to  the  manufacture  of  foreign  flour.    Many
gob:n  screens  and  cleansebs.  131
persons  thought  that  the  Ei^nch  millers  could  make  flour better  aud  cheaper  thaa  ourselves,  and  the  large  import  of  fine floor  flrom  !France  had  given  weight  to  this  opinion :  but  the comparison  of  machinery  and  means  of  manufacture  exhi- bited in  the  French  and  Belgian  divisions  proved  that  on  the whole  the  English  miller  h&d  no  cause  for  apprehension, all^iough  there  were  many  things  he  might  learn  with advantage  from  his  neighbours.  Time  has  shown  that  the exjxort  of  &iie  flour  from  France  was  chieflv  owing  to political  causes  affecting  the  commerce  of  the  country, which  for  a  period  caused  the  demand  for  it  there  to  be much  lessened,  and  the  price  to  be  so  much  reduced  as  to pay  for  its  transport  and  sale  in  London,  during  the  un- settled state  of  Paris.
The  com  delivered  to  the  mill  by  the  English  farmers  is generally  well  cleaned  ;  but  since  the  importation  of  foreign com  in  large  quanlitieSy  which  in  some  instances  has  lain  in heaps  on  the  ground  without  covering  from  the  weather until  it  could  be  shipped,  it  has  become  requisite  in  exten- sive mills,  which  manufacture  flour  from  all  kinds  of  com that  may  be  brought  to  them,  to  provide  machinery  for separating  light  or  damaged  grain  from  the  sound  wheat, and  also  to  free  it  from  sand  and  stones.
For  this  purpose,  corn-screens  and  cleansers  of  various plans,  made  of  wire  or  perforated  metal,  aided  by  a  fen- blast,  have  been  the  means  employed.  The  system  of washing  the  com  to  free  it  from  impurities  and  afberwards drying  on  a  kiln,  "  la  vde  hwmide,^^  of  the  French,  is  not much  practised  here ;  the  millers  finding  the  opposite  plan, or  dry  system,  "  la  voie  siche,^^  more  convenient.
Suppose  a  vertical  cylinder  or  drum,  revolving  280  to  350 times  in  a  minute,  covered  externally  with  sheet-iron,  pierced with  an  infinite  number  of  small  holes,  so  that  the  asperities of  their  edges  project  outwards,  and  placed  inside  of  another cylinder,  lined  internally  with  perforated  sheet-iron,  the sharp  edges  of  the  holes  projectiug  inwards  with  an  annular space  between  them  just  sufficient  to  admit  a  grain  of  wheat, care  being  taken  that  it  does  not  "  pearl "  or  skin  the  com. Let  the  mtemal  drum  be  about  5  or  6  ft.  high,  and  its diameter  about  20  inches.  On  the  top  of  the  drum  let there  be  a  fan,  with  four  blades  or  wings,  revolving  very, rapidly,  and  suppose  the  com  to  be  carried  u^  by  the Jacob's  ladder  and  dropped  into  this  fan,  it  is  obvious  that all  light  com,  dust^  straw,  chaff,  and  such  like  things,  will
132  WASHING  AND   DRYING  COEN.
be  driven  off  by  the  wind  of  the  fan,  and  that  all  heavy bodies,  as  stones,  nails,  sticks,  and  the  like,  will  be  driven off  by  centrifugal  force,  and  may  be  caught  in  an  enlarged part  of  the  case  properiy  designed  to  receive  them ;  but such  particles  of  earth  and  grains  of  bad  wheat  which  are  of the  same  size  and  weight  of  good  com  fall  down  with  it  into the  space  between  the  two  cylinders,  and  pass  in  a  spiral direction  from  top  to  bottom.  In  passing  downwards,  they receive  a  severe  rasping  from  the  two  plates  of  iron,  which, like  nutmeg  graters,  break  the  skin  of  the  damaged  com, and  crack  the  little  pellets  of  earthy  matter  or  sand,  in their  descent,  and  also  cleanse  the  com  of  sprouts,  beards, and  other  protuberant  excrescences.  At  the  bottom  is  an- other fan,  which  separates  the  dust,  smut,  and  other  light matters  rubbed  off  the  grain,  which  being  caught  and  re- tained, the  com  passes  into  a  slightly  inclined  cylinder  or cribbling  machine,  about  20  inches  in  diameter  and  12  or 13  feet  long,  covered  with  smooth  plates  full  of  small  holes, and  by  it  all  things  smaller  than  a  grain  of  wheat,  but  of  the same  specific  gravity,  which  the  two  fans  had  failed  to separate,  are  taken  out  of  the  com, — ^larger  things  of  equal weight  having  been  grated  down  by  the  drum,  and  heavier things  driven  off  by  the  fans.
"When  there  is  plenty  of  good  water  and  plenty  of  room, the  humid  mode  of  treatment  has  its  advocates,  and  they have  many  good  reasons  to  advance.  The  author  well  re- members, many  years  ago,  visiting  the  mills  of  Mr.  Pilling, at  Mirfield,  near  Bradford,  Yorkshire,  who  very  successfully treated  his  com  in  this  way.  His  mode  of  drying  it  was peculiar.  Suppose  a  building  three  stories  high;  and  on the  ground-floor  a  stove  or  cockle,  such  as  is  used  to  dry yam,  consisting  of  an  iron  chamber  or  oven,  with  a  fire- grate in  the  bottom  of  it,  enclosed  in  another  iron  case, leaving  a  space  of  15  or  18  inches  between  the  two  on  every side,  so  that  fresh  air  could  pass  through  and  be  heated :  by the  side  of  this  cockle  was  placed  a  powerful  fan-blast  to drive  the  air  through  this  space,  which  being  heated  as  it passed,  went  up  through  the  floor  above,  and  filled  a  low room  or  chamber,  made  air-tight  or  nearly  so :  this  room was  only  about  five  feet  high  between  the  floors.  The  first .floor  was  laid  ^wdth  Yorkshire  pavers  on  cast-iron  joists,  and the  second  floor  was  laid  with  perforated  kiln  plates  pierced with  an  immense  number  of  small  holes  cast  in  them.  This was  a  lofty  room  '^^ith  a  cowl,  like  a  malt-house,  and  upon
THE  SACK  TACKLE.  133
tills  floor  was  spread  the  wbeat  to  be  dried,  through  which the  hot  air,  urged  by  the  action  of  the  fan,  found  its  way.
This  arrangement  was  not  only  found  to  be  very  useful in  drying  com  after  it  had  been  washed,  but  it  was  also very  beneficial  in  drying  com  that  had  been  exposed  to  wet on  the  field,  and  prevented  it  from  spoiling,  as  well  as  in giving  the  requisite  degree  of  dryness  which  millers  prefer. The  extreme  hardness  and  dryness  of  much  of  the  Italian wheat,  and  the  produce  of  some  parts  of  the  south  of  France, render  the  com,  unless  it  be  moistened  to  make  it  "  grind kindly,"  apt  to  splinter  and  break,  like  ground  rice,  rather than  to  flag  out  into  meal,  when  the  flour  and  bran  readily separate.
The  com  being  treated  in  the  dry  or  the  humid  way,  if  it require  either,  or  if  it  be  clean  English  wheat  carefully dressed  and  winnowed  by  the  farmer,  it  is  brought  to  the proper  shoots  to  be  delivered  into  the  millstones  and  ground, by  means  of  the  endless  screw  and  the  Jacob's  ladder,  or  in mills  of  less  size  and  pretension  it  is  shot  from  the  sack  by the  miller  as  he  wants  it.
When  the  wheat  arrives  at  the  mill,  in  the  barge  or  the farmer's  waggon,  it  is  hoisted  up  by  the  sack-tackle — a  very simple  but  ingenious  machine,  which  ought  to  be  much more  generally  used  in  all  places  where  merchandise  is  to be  lifted  and  loaded  or  warehoused.
Let  us  return  to  the  mill  driven  by  spur-gear,  with  a vertical  shaft  in  the  centre,  extending  from  the  bottom  of the  mill  to  the  top.  On  the  upper  end  of  the  vertical  shaft is  fixed  a  horizontal  wheel,  bevelled  on  the  face  and  clad with  wood  fitted  iato  it  endways  and  turned  smooth :  against this  works  another  wheel  made  in  the  same  way  (without teeth  in  either  of  them),  but  the  grain  of  the  wood  being at  right  angles  with  the  faces  of  the  wheels  ;  the  two,  when brought  in  close  contact  by  means  of  a  compound  lever,  bite together  with  sufficient  adhesion  to  hoist  a  sack  of  wheat  or flour.  This  contact  is  produced  by  the  miller  pulling  a  cord attached  to  the  lever,  and  the  wheels  are  brought  forcibly together;  the  upright  shaft  always  revolving  while  the mill  is  going,  but  the  other  wheel,  which  carries  a  roller and  a  chain,  revolves  only  when  the  cord  is  puUed  and while  the  two  wheels  are  kept  in  contact.
The  miller  makes  a  noose  with  the  ring  at  the  end  of  the chain,  tackles  the  sack,  and  pulls  the  cord ;  the  wheels  are brought  into  contact,   and  the  sack  ascends,  opening  the
134<  SOKE  MILLS  JlSH)  MTLIJBKS.
trap-doors  in  each  succeedrng  floor,  which  again  close  as  it passes  through  them,  until  the  sack  attains  the  required height,  when  he  ceases  to  pull  the  cord,  and  lands  it.  In like  manner,  when  he  wants  to  lower  a  sack  of  flour  into  a bai^  or  waggon,  he  tackles  it  with  the  noose,  and  hfks  it by  pulling  the  cord,  then  shoves  it  off,  and  preventing acceleration  by  an  occasional  and  dexterous  puU  of  the  cord, he  drops  it  into  the  hands  of  the  bargeman  or  waggoner, who  guides  its  fall  into  the  proper  place.
Such  is  a  brief  outline  of  the  mechanism  of  a  corn-mill, whether  driven  by  water  or  by  steam ;  the  windmill  is  fast disappearing  from  the  rural  landscape,  and  the  author regrets  the  annihilation  of  one  in  which,  when  a  boy,  he spent  many  a  pleasant  hour;  but  surrounding  buildings took  the  wind  out  of  its  sails,  "  and  its  destiny  was  accom- pHshed."
Let  it  not  be  supposed  by  the  readers  of  the  present  day that  the  author  wntes  of  tunes  long  past :  he  writes  of  his own  time.  "When  George  the  Third  was  King,"  every Parliament  was  occupied  in  framing  regulations  respecting flour  and  bread,  and  most  men  of  middle  age  remember when  everything  relating  to  flour  and  bread  came  under  the cognisance  of  the  magistrates,  who  flxed  the  price  of  the quartern  loaf  and  the  size  of  the  penny  loaf.
By  the  36  Geo.  3,  cap.  85  (1796),  "Every  miUer  shall keep  balances  and  weights  according  to  the  standard  of the  Exchequer,  and  in  default  shall  forfeit  twentv  shillings. Millers  are  to  deliver  the  whole  produce  of  com  when  ground if  required,  allowing  for  waste  on  grinding  and  dressing, and  for  toll  when  taken ;  and  if  such  com  shall  weigh  less than  the  ftdl  weight,  such  miller  shall,  for  every  bushel  of com  deficient  in  weight  forfeit  a  shilling  and  treble  the value  of  such  deficiency.  When  toU  is  taken,  it  shall  be deducted  before  the  com  is  put  into  the  mill,  and  no  miller shall  demand  com  for  toll  imder  penalty  of  five  pounds,  ex- cept when  persons  shall  not  have  money  to  pay  for  grinding. Every  miller  shall  put  up  in  his  null  a  table  of  the  amoimt of  such  toU  or  multure,  or  forfeit  twenty  shillings  for  each offence,  but  this  shall  not  extend  to  mills  called '  Soke  mills,' or  to  such  ancient  mills  as  are  established  by  custom  and the  law  of  the  land,  which  mills  shall  continue  to  take  toll as  they  have  been  accustomed  to  do."
The  inhabitants  of  two  of  the  largest  manufacturing towns  in  England  are  still  compelled  to  have  their  corn
THB  ALBION  MILLS.  136
ground  at  the  '^  Soke  mills,"  and  to  eat  no  other  bread. Leeds  and  Wakefield  have  risen  rapidly  in  population  and wealth,  but  when  they  were  small  communities,  they  peti- tioned their  lords  to  build  them  mills,  and  in  return  bound themselves  and  their  successors  for  ever  to  grind  their  com there^— an  obligation  which,  in  these  days  of  free  trade,  they would  gladly  cancel  if  they  could.  There  are  other  places in  the  same  condition,  but  they  are  content  to  give  "  the lords'  mill "  the  preference  to  which  it  is  by  law  entitled, so  long  as  the  lord  of  the  manor  will  grind  at  market-price, without  resisting  his  lordship  "  upon  principle."  Yet  it  is not  to  be  supposed  that  such  privileges,  or  even  the  toll taken  by  the  miiler,  passed  unquestioned  or  unresisted,  for the  41  Geo.  3,  c.  24,  enacts  that  the  damages  occasioned  by demolishing  a  mill  by  persons  riotously  assembled  may  be recovered  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  statute,  respecting  the demolishing  of  churches  and. other  buildings;  while  the 43  Q-eo.  3,  c.  68  (1802-3),  enacts  that  any  person  who  shall maliciously  set  fire  to  any  miU  in  the  possession  of  any other  person  or  of  any  body  corporate,  shall  be  guilty  of felony,  and  sufier  death  without  benefit  of  clergy.
Mr.  James  Watt,  at  a  late  period  of  his  life,  thus  writes : "  The  mention  of  the  Albion  mills  induces  me  to  say  a  few words  respecting  an  establishment  so  unjustly  calumniated in  its  day,  and  the  premature  destruction  of  which,  by  fire, in  1791,  was  not  improbably  imputed  to  design.  So  far from  being,  as  misrepresented,  a  monopoly  injurious  to the  public,  it  was  the  means  of  considerably  reducing  the price  of  flour,  while  it  continued  at  work.
"  It  consisted  of  two  engines,  each  of  fifty  horses'  power, and  twenty  pairs  of  millstones,  of  which  twelve  or  more pairs,  with  the  requisite  machinery  for  dressing  the  flour and  for  other  purposes^  were  generally  kept  at  work.
"  In  place  of  wooden  wheels,  always  subject  to  frequent derangement,  wheels  of  cast  iron  with  the  teeth  truly formed  and  finished,  and  properly  proportioned  to  the  work, were  here  employed ;  and  other  machinery,  which  used  to be  made  of  wood,  was  made  of  cast-iron  of  an  improved form ;  and  I  believe  the  work  executed  here  may  be  said  to form  the  commencement  of  that  system  of  millwork  which has  proved  so  useful  to  the  country.
"  In  the  construction  of  that  mill-work  and  machinery, Boulton  and  Watt  derived  most  valuable  aasistance  from that  able  mechanician  and  engineer,  Mr.  John  Eennie,  then
186  •    MANUFACTUBE  OP  FLOTJR.
just  entering  into  business,  who  assisted  in  planning  them, and  under  whose  direction  they  were  executed.
"  The  engines  and  mill-work  were  contained  in  a  com- modious and  elegant  building,  designed  and  executed  under the  direction  of  the  late  Mr.  Samuel  "Wyatt,  architect."
Such  was  the  fate  of  the  first  great  steam-mill  erected  in London  little  more  than  sixty  years  ago,  in  which  the  talents of  Watt  and  Eennie  were  combined.  The  year  1852  has witnessed  the  completion  of  an  imdertaking — "  The  City Flour  Mills," — ^which  may  be  termed  a  flour  manufactory rather  than  a  mill,  built  near  Black&iars  Bridge,  and  within sight  of  the  spot  where  the  "  Albion  Mills  "  were  erected — an  enterprise  which,  if  successful,  as  it  promises  to  be,  will effect  great  changes  in  this  branch  of  industry.
The  present  cotton  mills  in  Manchester  are  scarcely  more unlike  the  old  system  of  hand-spinning,  than  is  this  building as  compared  with  the  picturesque  water-mills  we  were accustomed  to  see  in  our  young  days.  It  has  two  engines working  together  on  one  shaft;  they  are  large  "steam- packet  "  engines,  each  of  125  horses'  power,  or,  together, 250.  There  will  be  60  pairs  of  millstones,  all  of  them 4  feet  in  diameter,  and  making  about  128  revolutions  per minute ;  the  upper  millstones  have  hollow  backs,  and  a  blast is  sent  into  them;  thence  it  passes  through  the  eye  and through  holes  in  the  top  stone;  the  air  quickens  the grindmg,  and  makes  the  stones  work  cool.  The  millstones are  placed  in  two  rows,  one  against  each  side  wall,  on  one floor.  The  flour  is  received  in  covered  metal  troughs,  in which  endless  screws  work  the  meal  along  into  boxes,  to  be carried  away  by  the  Jacob's  ladders  or  elevators.
The  dressing-machines  are  hexagonal,  and  are  covered with  silk ;  they  are  3  ft.  4  in.  in  diameter  across  the  angles, and  34  fb.  long,  and  have  a  sHght  inclination,  about  20  inches in  their  whole  length,  and  are  driven  at  about  28  or  30 revolutions  in  a  minute.  The  shafts  of  these  machines  are hollow,  and  have  also  holes  through  them;  but  the  lower half  of  the  shaft  is  closed ;  a  blast  is  driven  into  the  upper end  of  the  hollow  shaft,  and  blows  through  the  holes  into the  inside  of  the  dressing-mill,  for  about  half  its  length,  and through  the  silk,  so  that  it  cools  the  flour,  cleans  the  silk, and  quickens  the  action  of  dressing.
There  are  some  wire  machines  for  brushing  the  bran,  but all  the  flour  is  dressed  through  silk,  the  chief  object  being to  make  fine  flour.    There  are,  besides   corn-cleansers,  also
THE   CITY   FLOUR  MILLS.
187
with  a  blast,  somewhat  like  those  already  described,  and sack-tackles,  worked  by  belts,  many  of  which  are  double- acting,  at  every  point  where  they  can  be  made  useful,  so that  manual  labour  may  b,e  economised  at  every  stage  of the  work  by  the  intervention  of  mechanical  power.
All  the  millstones  and  most  of  the  machines  are  driven  by belts,  which  lessen  the  noise  considerably,  and  much  in- genuity is  displayed  in  theur  application  to  prevent  lateral stress  on  the  necks  of  the  mill  spindles  and  to  obviate  the other  objections  to  belts  before  mentioned :  the  spindles  are long,  and  have  no  foot-bridges,  each  being  stepped  on  a
Fig.  47.
a  The  waste  air  trunk  carrying  up  the  dust  or  stive.
h  The  meal  spout.
c  Collar  or  ring  of  leather  to  confine  the  air  brought  in  by  a  flexible
pipe. d  Forked  end  of  the  lever  to  regulate  the  supply   of  com  to  the
millstones.    The  arrows  show  the  course  of  the  air.
hollow  pillar,  containing  a  regulating  screw,  and  the  upper stones  are  hung,  like  a  mariner's  compass,  on  gymbal  rings, and  carefully  balanced :  so  that  altogether  it  may  be  said this  is  a  jlou/r  factory  rather  than  a  corn-mill ;  and  in  order
138  THE   CONICAL  MILLS.
that  nothing  may  be  wasted,  exhausting-fans  are  applied  to the  millstone  cases,  producing  a  slight  draft  of  air  sufficient to  collect  and  deposit  in  a  proper  chamber,  the  dust,  or "«^»w,"  as  millers  call  it;  but  not  strong  enough  to  carry up  the  meal.  This  also  keeps  the  mill  cleaner,  and  the stive,  which  is  finer  than  flour,  can  be  made  useful.  The author  is  much  indebted  to  Messrs.  Swayne  &  Bovill,  who have  designed  and  erected  the  machinery  of  this  mill,  for their  readmess  in  affording  him  information  and  access  at aU  times  to  this  magnificent  establishment.
Mr.  Bovill  proposes  to  apply  blowing  and  exhausting  fans to  ordinary  millstones  already  in  use,  without  making  holes through  them,  by  sending  the  current  of  air  through  the millstone  eye  to  be  discharged  at  the  circumference,  and  to collect  the  dust  or  "  stive  "  from  the  millstone  cases  by  the exhaustinp-fan,  and  prevent  its  fiying  about  the  mill, carrying  it  up  through  an  air-trunk,  and  discharging  it into  a  chamber  of  lattice-work  lined  with  buntrag  or  some similar  thin  woollen  cloth,  permitting  the  air  to  escape,  but retaining  the  dust.  The  annexed  woodcut  shows  the  pro- posed arrangements.     (See  fig.  47.)
CHAPTEE  XIII.
THE  CONICAL  MILLS.
Op  the  conical  com-mills  exhibited  in  the  Crystal  Palace, there  were  two  which  more  particularly  claimed  attention. One  of  these  was  a  cone,  or  rather  a  conoid  of  stone  of peculiar  form,  base  upwards,  which  fitted,  or  nearly  so,  into a  block  of  stone  hoUowed  out  to  receive  it,  and  in  which  it revolved,  like  the  ancient  "  quern,'*  or  like  the  old  mill  found at  Pompeii  reversed ;  for  in  that  antique  null,  the  cone  or conoid  stood  fixed  upon  its  base  and  the  stone  casing revolved,  but  in  this  modem  adaptation,  the  case  is  fixed and  the  conoid  turns.
The  form  given  to  this  millstone  was  also  recommended by  the  exhibitor  as  applicable  to  the  pivots  or  steps  of upright  shafts,  screw  propellers,  turbines,  and  other  mecha- msm  where  the  revolving  surface  must  resist  vertical  weight or  end  thrust.
THE  CONICAL  MILLS.
139
The  inventor  proposed  to  exhaust  the  air  from  below  the millstones  by  means  of  a  ventilator  or  fan,  and  thus  to  draw down  a  current  between  the  stones  to  keep  them  cool. There  was  much  ingenuity  displayed  in  various  contrivances about  this  mill  and  its  adjuncts;  the  trouble  and  incon-
FJg.48. MR.  SGHIELE'S  MILL.
RULER
Mode  of  striking  the  curre  to  fonn  the  millstone  or  pirot.
venience  occasioned  by  the  cutting  and  heating  of  steps  and pivots  subject  to  end  pressure,  even  in  an  ordinary  lathe, are  well  known,  and  should  the  mill  itself  not  prove  so
140  THE   CONICAL  MILLS.
successful  in  practice  for  grinding  com  as  the  inventor expects,  it  may  answer  well  in  grinding  painters'  colours ; the  form  of  step  he  recommends  may  in  many  cases  be  useful to  lessen  the  friction  of  machinery.  Mr.  C.  Schiele  of  Oldham, near  Manchester,  is  the  proprietor  of  this  mDl,  and  the  curre he  has  adopted  is  one  discovered  by  Huygens,  in  his  inves- tigation of  the  cycloid.  It  is  one  of  those  singular  and beautiftd  curves  called  "  tractories,"  and  in  this  case  it  is produced  b;^  drawing  the  centre  point  of  a  radius  bar  along a  straight  une,  which  is  the  axis  of  the  curve.  The  radius bar  carries  a  pen,  the  nib  of  which  is  in  the  line  of  the radius.  At  the  commencement  of  the  curve,  the  radius  is at  right  angles  with  the  axis,  but  the  radius  bar,  turning  freely upon  the  centre  point,  as  it  is  drawn  along  the  straight  line or  axis,  the  angle  it  makes  with  this  Une  varies  continually, becoming  more  and  more  acute  Hke  the  tangent  of  a  catenaiy or  a  parabola.  Dr.  Peacock  has  shown  that  the  mechanical tractory  of  a  straight  line,  upon  a  perfectly  smooth  plane,  is an  inverted  semi-cycloid ;  but,  in  this  case,  the  retardation produced  by  the  pen  and  paper  causes  the  curve  to  be infinite,  and  from  its  peculiar  properties  it  has  been  termed "  the  equitangential  tractory."     (See  fig.  48.)
The  conoid  is  formed  by  this  curve  revolving  on  its  axis.
The  other  conical  flour-mill,  which  deservedly  attracted much  notice  in  the  Exhibition,  was  the  invention  of Mr.  "W.  "Westrup,  a  practical  London  miller.  It  differed entirely  from  any  other  flour-mill  hitherto  used,  and  the author  availed  himself  of  all  the  opportunities  the  display  in the  Crystal  Palace  permitted  to  examine  its  mechanism  and arrangements;  he  has  since  seen  it  at  work,  and  also  in pieces,  the  proprietors  liberally  affording  every  facility  for the  inspection  of  aU  the  parts  in  detail.  Each  mill,  so  to speak,  has  two  pairs  of  millstones  combined,  working together,  the  one  pair  placed  above  the  other,  so  that  the upper  pair  commences  the  grinding  process,  and  the  lower pair  completing  it ;  there  is  a  space  between  the  two  pairs  of millstones  about  27  or  30  inches  in  height,  and  the  greater portion  of  this  height  or  space  is  used  as  a  vertical  dressing- mill,  the  spindle  which  drives  »the  stones  being  fitted  with brushes,  and  the  space  inclosed  with  a  cylindrical  screen  of fine  wire-cloth  mounted  on  a  frame  in  the  usual  way.  The upper  millstones  are  fixed,  and  the  lower  stones  revolve, and  both  the  upper  and  lower  stones  are  placed  upon  one spindle.    The  upper  stones  are  each  made  in  two  parts,  or
THE   CONICAL   MILLS.  141
semicircles  bolted  together,  for  convenience  of  fixing  and displacing  when  needful,  and  they  are  capable  of  adjustment by  means  of  fixed  wedges  or  inclined  planes,  on  which  they rest,  so  that  by  the  action  of  a  screw  and  wheel  a  partial horizontal  turn  or  twist  of  either  of  the  upper  stones,  causes it  to  slide  up  or  down  on  these  bent  wedges  or  inclined planes  which  are  placed  round  the  circumference  of  the stone.  It  is  thus  raised  or  lowered,  and  the  grinding  space adjusted  with  great  facility.  The  lower  millstones,  which revolve,  are  convex,  and  the  upper  stones  concave  and annular ;  for  the  stones  being  of  small  diameter  the  eye  of the  stone  is  large  in  proportion.  The  diameter  is  about 2  feet  6  inches,  and  the  grinding  surface  on  each  side  of  this ring  of  stone  8  or  9  inches  broad ;  the  rise  or  bevel  of  the cone  in  that  width  is  about  4  inches.  The  stones  being small,  necessarily  revolve  rapidly,  say  about  250  revolutions per  minute,  and  the  spindle  being  hoUow  from  the  top,  a pipe  is  fitted  into  it  by  a  swivel-joint,  and  a  blast  of  air driven  by  a  fan  is  carried  down  the  spindle,  which  is  closed at  the  lower  end,  and  distributed  through  holes  in  the running  stones  into  the  grinding  space,  so  that  the  meal  is immediately  blown  out,  and  the  grinding  surfaces  kept  clear. The  finest  flour  is  brushed  through  the  wire-work  of  the vertical  cylinder,  and  received  in  a  casing  of  wood.  The larger  particles  and  portions  of  the  com  imperfectly  ground, pass  into  the  lower  pair  of  stones,  and  are  reduced  into meal  ready  for  dressing  in  the  ordinary  way.
As  by  this  arrangement  of  parts  the  corn  cannot  be delivered  into  the  centre  of  the  upper  millstones,  a  hopper or  chamber  is  placed  on  one  side,  with  a  sliding  tube  or  feed- pipe in  the  top  of  it,  and  an  upright  spindle  carrying  a  dish, which  revolving  quickly,  evenly  distributes  the  com.  This description  will  probably  enable  the  reader  to  understand the  annexed  engraving,  which  is  copied  from  a  section obtained  from  the  inventor.     (See  fig.  49.)
The  manner  in  which  this  mill  does  its  work  is  very- satisfactory.  The  com  is  so  short  a  time  in  passing  through it,  that  the  bran  is  delivered  in  large  flakes,  many  of  them nearly  the  entire  skin  of  the  wheat,  and  the  grinding  being  so quicUy  done  the  meal  comes  away  comparatively  cold.  The fine  flour  driven  through  the  intermediate  dressing-case  is the  heart  or  kernel  of  the  wheat,  and  is  suited  for  pastry  or confectionary.
There  is  a  vertical  dressing-mill  separate  from  the  mill-
142
THE   CONICAL   MILLS. Fig.  49.
WESTBUP'a  COKICAL  MILL.
THE   CONICAL   MILLS.  143
Beferenca  to  Mr.  Westrup'a  Conical  MtU,    (See  WoodciU.)
A,  Feeding-pipe  to  supply  com  to  the  millstones.
B,  Apparatus  to  regulate  the  supply.
o.  Regulating  lever  to  adjust  the  same.
D,  Chamber  over  the  eye  of  the  millstone  to  receive  the  wheat
from  the  regulator. B,  Top  stone  in  the  upper  pair  of  millstoneB  which  in  this  mill  is
stationary. ¥,  Nether  stone  of  the  upper  pair  which  in  this  mill  revolves.
0,  Top  stone  (stationary)  of  the  lower  pair. H,  Nether  stone  (runner)  of  the  lower  pair.
1,  Hollow  spindle  on  which  the  runners  or  revolving  millstones
are  hung.
E,  Bevelled  wheels  and  driving-shaft.
L,  Iron  framework  sustaining  the  whole  machine.
M,  Upright  wire  cylinder  acting  as  a  partial  dressing  machine.
N,  Revolving  bruiiies  acting  against  the  wire.
M,  o.  Wooden  case  enclosing  millstones  and  wire  cylinder,  to  the
bottom  of  which  the  spout  for  the  meal  is  fixed, p,  Pipe  to  convey  cold  air  to  the  faces  of  the  millstones  by  means
of  the  hollow  spindle. Q,  Regulator  for  adjusting  the  upper  pair  of  millstones. R,  Regulator  for  adjusting  the  lower  pair.
stones,  in  which  the  flour  is  flnished  for  the  market,  and there  has  been  much  ingenuity  exercised  in  contrivances  to obviate  the  inconveniences  incident  in  general  to  the  per- pendicular cylinder.  The  axis  carries  a  series  of  shelves  or tables,  which  ux  succession  receive  the  meal  and  scatter  it  by their  centrifugal  action ;  but  it  is  questionable  whether  any real  adyantages  are  obtained  by  carrying  the  inclination  of the  dressing-mill  beyond  the  angle  of  46  degrees,  for  at that  angle,  with  a  high  speed  for  the  brushes,  the  meal  must describe  a  spiral  track  of  several  revolutions  in  traversing the  length  of  the  cylinder,  and  the  adaptation  of  hoppers, with  moveable  partitions  before  described,  is  of  great practical  convenience.
The  inventor  of  this  conical  mill  has  induced  several gentlemen  to  join  him  in  order  to  carr^  out  his  plans  to  a greater  extent  than  he  could  hope  to  do  individuaUy,  and  to form  themselves  into  a  joint-stock  company.  They  entertain, in  many  respects,  similar  ideas  on  the  manufacture  of  flour with  the  proprietors  of  the  large  steam-mills  already  noticed, namely,  that  flour,  like  cloth,  is  a  manufactured  article  of general  coQSumption,  and  that  by  manufactipnng  on  the
144  THE   CONICAL  MILLS.
large  scale,  with  maclimery  to  do  the  work,  and  men  to direct  its  operations,  rather  than  to  labour  in  the  mill,  thej shall  be  able  to  supply  the  flour  to  the  consumer  at  a  lower price  with  a  fair  profit  for  themselves  ;  they  also  think  that the  inventions  of  Mr.  Westrup  will  better  enable  tliem  to realise  their  views,  and  it  is  but  right  to  say,  that  several persons  have  embarked  m  this  undertaking — "  The  Conical Flour-mill  Company  " — who  are  known  as  men  of  experience and  skiU  in  this  branch  of  industry.
These  gentlemen  say — "  It  is  scarceljr  necessary  to  observe that  the  vast  resources  of  England  durmg  the  last  fifty  years have  depended  on  her  improved  machinery.  It  has  indeed been  said  with  equal  truth,  that  her  independence  as  a nation  rests  upon  her  being  twenty  years  in  advance  of  her neighbours.  And  never  was  it  more  necessary  to  maintain such  pre-eminence  than  at  this  time  of  great  struggle, when  the  importation  of  wheat  and  flour  has  been  made  free to  all  nations,  before  the  agricultural  and  milling  interests, and  the  large  capital  invested  in  them,  have  been  prepared to  meet  the  competition  of  the  world.  Thus  it  is  that improvements  in  these  important  departments  of  British industry  are  now  more  especially  occupying  the  serious attention  of  some  of  the  first  minds  in  the  kingdom — ^from the  prince  to  the  peasant — as  a  necessary  requirement  for their  profitable  continuance."
The  author  hopes  that  the  circulation  of  this  little  volume may  stimulate  inquiry  and  research  among  the  practical  and operative  men  into  whose  hands  it  may  fall ;  and  that  the facts  and  circumstances  which  have  rather  been  indicated than  described,  may  form  as  it  were  the  text,  which  in  more able  and  experienced  hands  may  be  amplified  and  illustrated. The  work  has  been  hastily  written  at  internals,  when  the author  could  spare  a  short  time  to  add  a  few  pages  or  to note  down  a  few  observations  as  they  might  occur,  without much  opportunity  of  arranging  them  afterwards.
This  wiU  be  apparent  to  all  who  may  read  this  book, and  it  will  also  be  noticed,  that  the  words  of  the  authors quoted  throughout  the  volume,  are  generally  given  as they  were  found,  in  the  phrase  of  their  own  style  and time,  so  that  the  lesson  may  be  learned  as  they  taught it.  It  has  been  exceedingly  gratifying  to  the  author, and  he  has  much  pleasure  in  acknowledging  it,  that whenever  he  has  had  occasion  to  verify  a  fact,  to  correct a  statement,   or  to  ask  information^   he    has,   in  every
PERSONS  AND  BOOKS  CONSULTED.         145
instance,  been  met  with  the  greatest  firankness  and  candour, and  every  question  asked  has  been  fairly  answered — some by  letter,  and  some  personally.  It  is  difficult  to  mention names  when  so  many  persons  have  been  referred  to  and all  have  acted  alike,  yet  he  feels  he  should  be  ungrateful to  the  following  gentlemen  did  he  not  acknowledge  the obligations  he  is  under.  He  has  especially  to  thank  Messrs. Eai^me  &  May,  of  Ipswich,  well  known  as  manu&icturers of  agricultural  implements,  and  of  machines  for  cleausing and  dressing  wheat ;  Messrs.  Bryan  Corcoran,  ,and  Co.,  of Mark-lane,  importers  and  makers  of  millptones  and  grinding machinery ;  Messrs.  W.  Mountain  &  Sons,  of  Newcastle- on-Tyne,  celebrated  for  thieir  wire-work  and  dressing-mills; Messrs.  Swayne  &  Bovill,  the  millwrights  of  the  City  Mour Mills ;  Mr.  W  estrup,  the  inventor,  and  Mr.  Middleton,  the manufacturer  of  the  conical  corn-mill;  Mr.  Armstrong, the  inventor  of  the  hydraulic  crane,  and  maker  of  the water-pressure  engine;  Messrs.  Easton  &  Amos,  manu- facturers of  the  improved  water-rams;  and  many  other gentlemen.
In  writing  this  treatise,  the  works  of  Smeaton,  Hutton, Sir  Bobert  Kane,  and  Mr.  Beardmore,  and  the  papers  of Mr.  Blackwell,  Mr.  Eennie,  MM.  Morin,  Poncelet,  Piobert, Coladon,  and  other  foreign  engineers,  have  been  quoted,  and the  Transactions  of  the  Eoyal  Society,  the  Institution  of Civil  Engineers,  the  Society  of  Arts,  the  British  Associa- tion, the  Professional  Papers  of  the  Eoyal  Engineers,  and other  records  consulted.  In  all  of  those  above-named  the reader  will  find  much  information  and  many  valuable  expe- riments in  detail ;  but  to  do  justice  to  the  subject  which forms  the  concluding  part  of  this  little  book,  ITie  Frogress of  Com-milhy  and  the  Development  of  their  Machinery , would  require  a  large  and  amply  illustrated  volume,  rather than  a  simple  rudimentary  treatise  on  the  means  of preparing  the  staff  of  life  for  the  support  of  man.
APPENDIX.
CENTRIFUGAL  AND  ROTARY  PUMPS.
In  the  preceding  pages  the  reader  will  have  observed  that  several machines  derive  their  power  from  the  reaction  of  water-pressure  : such  as  Dr.  Barker's  mill,  Whitelaw's  mill,  the  Vortex-wheel, and  others.  If  these  machines  be  impelled  by  some  other  power, and  caused  to  revolve  by  an  equal  external  force,  say  that  of  a steam-engine,  they  may  be  made  to  act  as  pumps  ;  and  as  they had  before  been  put  in  motion  by  the  pressure  of  a  coluqin  of water  descending  and  passing  through  them,  they  would,  by inverse  action,  raise  a  corresponding  column  of  water  to  the  like height.
Let  the  most  simple  of  these  machines,  Dr.  Barker's  mill  (fig. 15),  be  turned  upsidfe-down, — let  the  funnel  mouth  at  the  top, there  shown  as  i*eceiving  the  water,  be  immersed  in  a  well,  and the  machine  caused  to  revolve  rapidly  on  its  axis ;  the  swift- rotary  motion  will  cause  a  partial  vacuum  in  the  arms,  and  the water  will  rise  in  the  central  pipe  and  fill  them  until  it  is  thrown out  at  the  holes  near  the  ends,  where  the  centrifugal  force  will cause  continuous  streams  te  be  discharged  so  long  as  the  requisite velocity  is  maintained.
The  straight  form  of  the  arms,  however,  causes  a  considerable loss  of  effect :  the  course  the  water  should  take  is  that  of  the curve  compounded  of  its  radial  direction,  and  of  the  rotary motion  of  the  machine,  for  any  radial  velocity  in  the  water,  at the  point  of  discharge,  is  power  uselessly  expended.  Anotiier centrifugal  machine,  having  the  same  diameter,  section,  and apertures,  but  having  the  arms  bent  to  the  proper  corvatrire, will  discharge  niore  than  double  the  quantity  of  water  in  the same  time  with  the  same  power — (see  figs.  18  and  20).  This  was proved  by  direct  experiments  made  by  Mr.  Hensman,  at  the request  ofthe  iury,  durinff  the  Great  Exhibition.
Thus  Mr.  Whitelaw's  mul  will  be  found  to  make  a  very  effective machine  for  raising  water,  by  reversing  its  action  ;  and  hence  it was  that  the  jury  found  Mr.  Appold's  wheel,  formed  with  vanes similarly  cui-ved,  produced  so  much  greater  results  than  wheels  of the  same  dimensions  with  straight  vanes.  Mr.  Appold*s  wheel was  only  12  inches  in  diameter ;  it  received  the  water  on  each
APPENDIX,
147
Bide,  through  apertures  of  6  inches  diameter,  aud  had  a  central disc  or  diaphragm  perpendicular  to  the  axis,  intersecting*  the vanes,  forming,  as  it  were,  a  double  wheel  revolving  between  two cheeks  that  projected  from  opposite  sides  of  the  reservoir.
The  vortex-wheel  (fig.  26),  perhaps,  may  serve  to  explain  the form  and  operation  of  Sir.  Appold's  pump,  by  supposing  the  axis to  be  horizontal,  and  the  water  to  enter  at  the  sides  and  be  dis- charged through  the  large  round  pipe.  When  this  wheel  was tried  against  two  others  of  the  same  size,  the  one  with  straight arms  or  vanes,  inclined  at  an  angle  of  45  degrees,  and  the  omer with  radial  arms,  the  following  results  were  obtained : —
Gallons  raised
Useful
per  minute.
per  minute.
Height  raised.
effect.
Mr.  Appold's  wheel .
792
1164
18  ft.  8  m.
•649
ff                    it        •
788
1286
19    „    4
•680
Inclined  vanes     .    .
694
560
18    „    0
•394
>»          »>        •    •
690
736
18    „    0
•434
Hadial  vanes    .    .    .
624
369
18    „    0
•232
ff         if      •    •    •
720
474
18    „    0
•243
The  experiments  were  made  under  the  direction  of  Colonel Morin,  and  the  amount  of  motive  power  employed  was  as- certained by  the  dynamometer,  constructed  by  M,  Morin,  on  a principle  proposed  by  General  Poncelet.
The  author  was  present  during  some  of  these  trials,  and  was gratified  to  witness  the  care  and  skill  with  which  they  were  con-^ ducted.
By  admitting  the  water  at  both  sides,  the  atmospheric  pressure is  neutralised  and  balanced  ;  this  is  not  the  case  in  Whitelaw's arrangement,  although  a  similar  method  has  been  used  in  other machines,  as  in  the  "  Fan-Blast,"  for  blowing  furnaces  and  forges, several  of  which  of  lar^e  size  have  been  constructed  by  the  author, and  machines,  similar  to  the  rotary-fan,  have  also  been  applied  to raise  water.
During  a  long  practice  in  the  drainage  of  extensive  tracts  of Fen  and  Marsh  lands,  by  steam-power,  where  natural  drainage was  impracticable,  the  author  employed  Scoop-Wheds  te  throw off  the  water.  These  were  like  the  Breast-wheel  reversed,  and  the reader  may  imagine  their  action  by  referring  to  fig.  29,  and supposing  the  wheel  te  lift  the  water,  instead  of  being  turned  by it.  Two  wheels  like  tljis,  28  feet  in  diameter,  driven  by  steam- engines,  were  constructed  by  the  author,  at  the  Butterley  Iron- works, some  years  ago,  for  the  drainage  of  Deeping  Fen,  near Spalding,  containing  about  25,000  acres,  then  often  covered  with water,  but  now  growing  com.  One  of  these  is  found  sufficient, except  in  very  rainy  seasons,  to  keep  the  Fen  clear  of  water.  It is  turned  by  an  engine  of  80  horse-power,  and  the  floats,  or
148  APPENDIX.
ladle-boards,  travel  at  a  mean  rate  of  6  feet  in  a  second  :  these measure  5i  X  5  feet,  and  deliver  a  constant  stream  of  water,  -with a  sectional  area  of  27J  square  feet,  which  moving  at  the  speed abovenamed,  discharges  165  cubic  feet,  equal  to  more  than  4^ tons  of  water  in  one  second;  or  about  16,200  tons  in  an hour.  A  more  simple  or  effectual  mode  of  raising  a  large body  of  water  to  a  height  of  ten  or  twelve  feet  (from  sur£Eu^ to  surface)  cannot  well  be  devised,  nor  one  less  liable  to  derange- ment, from  ice,  weeds,  and  drift-wood.  By  this  means  upwards of  125,000  acres  of  Fen-land  in  England  have  been  cleared  of water  under  the  author's  direction,  besides  similar  works  of drainage  in  Holland,  Germany,  and  in  British  Guiana,  where  the same  machinery  also  irrigates  the  land  in  the  dry  season.  For  the drainage  of  small  districts,  it  is  probable  that  rotary  or  centri- fugal pumps  may  be  used  with  advantage.  The  number  and variety  of  these  machines,  exhibited  at  the  Crystal  il^dace,  in 1851,  and  the  elaborate  and  valuable  experiments  then  made, have  afforded  data  for  their  construction  and  improvement,  which will  tend  to  make  their  application  to  such  purposes  more general,  and  prove  one  of  the  many  benefits  residting  from  that ever-memorable  display  of  industry  and  ingenuity.
THE   END.
LomwN:
BSADBUBY  AKD  EVANS,  PRINTBRA,  WRITEFRIAR3.
FfiIZE  HEOAL,  INTESNATIOlf AL  EXHIBITION,  1862,  was
awarded  to  Messrs.  VIRTUE  for  the  '*  publication  of
Weale's  Series."
See  JURORS'  RETORTS,
CLASS    XXIX.
CATALOGUE
RUDIMENTARY,  SCIENTIFIC,  EDUCATIONAL,  AND CLASSICAL  WORKS,
IX)R  COLLEGES,  HIGH  AND  ORDINARY  SCHOOLS, AND  SELF-INSTRUCTION ;
ALSO   FOR
MECHANICS*  INSTITUTIONS,  FEEE  LIBRARIES,  &c.  &c.,
PUBLISHED    BY
VIRTTJE    BROTHERS   &  CO.,  1,   AMES    C0R19ER,
PATERNOSTER  ROW.
«•*    THE    ENTIRE    SERIES    IS    FREEEY    ILLUSTRATED    ON   WOOD AND    STONE    WHERE    REQUISITE.
The  Public  are  respectfully  informed  that  the  whole  of  tlie late  Mr.  We  ale's  Publications,  contained  in  the  follo^oing  Catu- loguCf  have  been  purchased  by  Vibtub  Brothers  &  Co.,  and that  all  future  Orders  xcUl  be  supplied  by  them  at  1,  Amen Corner.
*«*  Additional  Volumes,  by  Popular  Authors,  are  in  Prepuration.
RUDIMENTARY    SERIES.
2.  NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY,  bj  Charles  Tomlinson.    Is,
12.  PNEUMATICS,  by  Charles  Tomlinson.    Is,
20.  PERSPECTIVE,  by  George  Pyne.    2».
27.  PAINTING;   or,  A  GRAMMAR  OF  COLOURING,  by  G. Field.    2s,         ^
40.  GLASS  STAINING,  by  Dr.  M.  A.  Gessert,  With  an  iippendix on  the  Art  of  Enamelling.     \s.
2  SCIENTIFIC  AND  MECHANICAL  WORKSf.
41.  PAINTINa  ON  GLASS,  from  ihe  German  of  Fromberg.    Is. 50.  LAW  OF  CONTRACTS  FOE  WOBKS  AND  SEEVICES^
by  David  Gibbons.    Is, 66.  CLAY  LANDS  AND  LOAMY' SOILS,  by  J.Donaldeon.    Is. 69.  MUSIC,  Treatise  on,  by  C.  C.  Spencer.    28.
71.  THE  PIAIfOFOETE  INSTRUCTIONS,  by  C.  C.  Spencer.    Is.
72.  RECENT   FOSSIL    SHELLS  (A  Manual  of  the  Mollusca),
by  S.  P.  Woodward.    55.  Qd.
In  cloth  boardB,  6ff.  6d. ;  half  morocco,  7«.  Bd.
79»*.  PHOTOGRAPHY,  a  Popular  Treatis©  on,  from  the  French of  D.  Van  Monckhoven,  by  W.  H.  Thomtliwaite.    Is.  6d.
96.  ASTRONOMY,  by  the  Rev.  R.  Main.    Is.
107;  METROPOLITAN  BUILDINGS  ACT,  and  THiB  METRO- POLITAN ACT  FOR  REGULATING  THE  SUPPLY OF  GAS,  with  Notes,  by  D.  Gibbons  and  R.  Hesketh.  28.  Qd.
108.  METROPOLITAN  LOCAL  MANAGEMENT  ACTS.   Is.  Qd. 108*.  METROPOLIS  LOCAL  MANAGEMENT  AMENDMENT
ACT,  1862 ;  with  Notes  and  Index,  Is.
109.  NUISANCES  REMOVAL  AND  DISEASE  PREVENTION
ACT.     1*    *
110.  RECENT   LEGISLATIVE   ACTS  applying  to  Contractors,
Merchants,  and  Tradesmen.     Is.
113.  USE  OF  FIELD  ARTILLERY  ON  SERVICE,  by  Jaubert, translated  by  Lieut.-Col.  H.  H.  MaxweU.     Is.  Qd.
113*.  MEMOIR  ON  SWORDS,  by  Marey,  translated  by  Lieut.-Col. H.  H.  MaiweU.     Is.
140.  OUTLINES  OF  MODERN  FARMING,  by  R.  Scott  Burn. Vol.  I. — Soils,  Maniures,  and  Crops.    .2s.
141.   Vol.  II.    Farming
Economy,  Historical  and  Practical.    Ss.
142.   Vol.  in.      Stock-^
Cattle,  Sheep,  and  Horses.    2s.  Qd.
145.   .  Vol.  IV.  Manage- ment of  the  Dairy — Pigs — Poultry.    28.
146.   ,  Vol.  V.  Utilisation  of
Town  Sewage — Irrigation — Reclamation  of  Waste  Land.  28. 6d. The  above  5  vola.  bound  in  2,  cloth  boards,  lis.
144.  COMPOSITION  AND  PUNCTUATION,  by  J.  Brenan.    1*.
151.  A  HANDY  BOOK  ON  THE  LAW  OF  FRIENDLY,  IN- DUSTRIAL AND  PROVIDENT,  BUILDING  AND  LOAN SOCIETIES.  With  Copious  Notes.  By  Nathaniel  White, Esq.     Is.  %
VIRTUE  BROTHERS  <&  CO.,  1,  AMEN  COBNER.
SCIENTIFIC  AND  MECHANICAL  WORKS.  8
162,  PRACTICAL  HINTS  FOR  INVESTING  MONEY:  with an  Explanation  of  the  Mode  of  Transacting  Business  on  the Stock  Exchange.    By  Francis  Play  ford,  Sworn  Broker.     1*.
150.  A  TREATISE  ON  LOGUC,  PURE  AND  APPLIED.  By S.  H.  Emmeoi,  Esq.    Is,  Qd.
PHYSICAL  SCIENCE.
1.  CHEMISTRY,  by  Prof.  Fownes,  including  Agricultural  Che- mistry, for  the  use  of  Farmers.     Is,
3.  GEOLOGY,  by  Major-Gen.  Portlock.     l^.  Qd,
4.  MINERALOGY,  with  a  Treatise  on  Mineral  Rocks  or  Aggre-
gates, by  Dana.    25.
7.  ELECTRICITY,  by  Sir  W.  S.  Harris.    Is.  Qd,
7*.  GALVANISM,  ANIMAL  AND  VOLTAIC  ELECTRICITY; by  Sir  W.  S.  Harris,     Is,  6d,
8.  MAGNETISM,  Exposition  of,  by  Sir  W.  S,  Harris.    3s.  6<f. 11.  ELECTRIC  TELEGRAPH,  History  of,  by  E,  Highton.    2*.
133.  METALLURGY  OF  COPPER,  by  R.  H.  Lambom.  2s.
134.  METALLURGY  OF  SILVER  AND  LEAD,  by  R.  H.  Lam-
born.    2s,
135.  ELECTRO-METALLURGY,  by  A.  Watt.    1^.  Qd.
138.  HANDBOOK  OF  THE  TELEGRAPH,  by  R.  Bond.    Is, 143.  EXPERIMENTAL  ESSAYS— On  the  Motion  of  Camphor and  Modem  Theory  of  Dew,  by  0.  Tomlinson.    Is.
BUILDING  AND  ARCHITECTURE.
16.  ARCHITECTURE,  Orders  of,  by  W.  H.  Leeds.    Is.
17.    ..      Styles  of,  by  T.  Buiy.    Is,  Qd.
18.    '   Principles  of  Design,  byE.  L.  GarbetL  2s.
22.  BUILDING,  the  Art  of,  by  E.  Dobson.    1*.
23.  BRICK  AND  TILE  MAKING,  by  E.  Dobson.    2s.
25.  MASONRY  AND  STONE-CUTTING,  by  E.  Dobson.    2s. 30.  DRAINING  AND  SEWAGE  OF  TOWNS  AJUD  BUILD-
INGS,  by  G|^.  Dempsey.    2s.
(With  No.  29,  Drainage  or  Land,  2  yols.  in  1,  Zs.)
VIRTUE  BROTHERS  A  CO.,  1,  AMEN  CORNER
4  SCIENTIFIC  AND  MECHANICAL  WORKS.
35.  BLASTING  AND  QUAEEYING  OF  STONE,  AND  BliOW-
ING  UP  OF  BRIDGES,  by  Lt.-aen.  Sir  J.  Burgoyne.   l^.  ed.
36.  DICTIONARY   OF   TERMS   used  by  Architects,    Builders,
Engineers,  Siureyors,  &c.    4s.
In  cloth  boards,  5i. ;  half  morocco,  Qs. 42.  COTTAGE  BUILDING,  by  C.  B.  AUen.     1*.
44.  FOUNDATIONS  and  CONCRETE  WORKS,  by  E.Dobson.   1^.
45.  LIMES,  CEMENTS,  MORTARS,  CONCRETE,    MASTICS,
&c.,  by  G.  R.  BurneU,     is.
57.  WARMING  AND  VENTILATION,  by  C.  Tomlinson.    3*.
83*»   CONSTRUCTION   OF  DOOR  LOCKS,  by  C.  Tomlinson. Is.  Qd.
111.  ARCHES,  PIERS,  AJUB  BUTTRESSES,  by  W.Bland.  Is.  6^.
116.  ACOUSTICS  OF  PUBLIC  BUILDINGS,  by  T.R.Smith.  U.Qd.
123.  CARPENTRY  AND    JOINERY,  founded  on  Robison  and
Tredgold.    Is.Qd.
123*.  ILLUSTRATIVE  PLATES  to  the  preceding.    4to.    4s.  Qd.
124.  ROOFS    FOR    PUBLIC    AND   PRIVATE    BUILDINGS,
founded  on  Robison,  Price,  and  Tredgold.     Is.  Qd.
124*.  IRON  ROOFS  of  Recent  Construction— Descriptive  Plates. 4to.  4^.  Qd.
127.  ARCHITECTURAL    MODELLING,  Practical  Instructiong,
by  T.  A.  Richardson.     Is.  6d.
128.  VITRUVIUS'S  ARCHITECTURE,  translated  by  J.  Gwilt,
with  Plates.    55.  ^
130.  GRECIAN  ARCHITECTURE,  Principles  of  Beauty  in,  by the  Earl  of  Aberdeen.    Is.
132.  ERECTION  OF  DWELLING-HOUSES,  with  Specifications, Quantities  of  Materials,  &c.,  by  S.  H.  Brooks,  27  Plates.  2s.  Gd
MACHINERY  AND    ENGINEERING.
33.  CRANES    AND    MACHINERY  FOR   RAISING   HEAVY
BODIES,  the  Art  of  Constructing,  by  J.  Glynn.     Is.
34.  STEAM  ENGINE,  by  Dr.  Lardner.     Is.
43.  TUBULAR  AND  IRON  GIRDER  BRIBOES,  including  tlie Britannia  and  Conway  Bridges,  by  G.  D.  Dempsey.     Is.
VITITUE  BROTHERS  &  CO.,  1,  AMEN  CORNER.
SCIENTIFIC  AND  MECHANICAL  WOHKS.  5
47.  LXQ^HTHOUSES,  their  Construction  and  nimnination,  by  Allan Steyenson.    Ss,
59.  STEAM  BOILEBS,  their  Constraction  and  Management,  by B.  Armstrong.    Is,  6d,
62.  RAILWAYS,  Constmction,  by  Sir  M.  Stephenson.    U.  Qd,
€2#.  BAILWAY  CAPITAL  AND  DIVIDENDS,  with  Statistics  of Working,  by  E.  D.  Chattaway.     U.
(Vols.  62  and  62»  bonnd  in  1,  25.  6i.)
67.  CLOCK  AND  WATCH  MAKING,  and  Church  Clocks  and Bells,  by  B.  B.  Denison.    3s.  6d,
78.  STEAM  AND  LOCOMOTION,  on  the  Principle  of  connecting Science  with  Practice,  by  J.  Sewell.    2*.
78».  LOCOMOTIVE  ENGINES,  by  G.  D.  Dempsoy.    1*.  Qd.
79*.  ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  THE  ABOVE.    4to.    48.  Qd.
98.  MECHANISM  AND  CONSTRUCTION  OF  MACHINES, by  T.  Baker ;  and  TOOLS  AND  MACHINES,  by  J.  Nasmy  th, with  220  Woodcuts.    2*.  Qd:
114.  MACHINERY,  Construction  and  Working,  by  C.  D.  Abel.
l8,Qd.
115.  PLATES  TO  THE  ABOVE.    4to.    7*.  6d.
139.  STEAM  ENGINE,  Mathematical  Theory  of,  by  T.  Baker.    Is.
CIVIL  ENQINEERINQ,  &c.
13.  CIVIL  ENGINEERING,  by  H.  Law  and  G.  R.  Bumell.  4s.  Od. 29.  DRAINING  DISTRICTS  AND  LANDS,  by  G.  D.  Dempsey.  1*. (With  No.  30,  DiuiKAGB  asd  Sewage  of  Towns,  2  yols.  in  1,  Ss.)
31.  WELL-SINKING,  BORING,  AND  PUMP  WORK,  by  J.  G.
Swindell,  revised  by  G.  R.  Burnell.    Is,
46.  ROAD-MAKING   AND   MAINTENANCE   OF  MACADA- MISED ROADS,  by  Gen.  Sir  J.  Burgoyne.    1*.  Qd.
CO.  LAND  AND  ENGINEERING  SURVEYING,  by  T.  Baker.  2#. VIRTUE  BROTHERS  &  CO.,  1,  AMEN  CORNER.
C  SCIENTIFIC  AND  MECHANICAL  WORKS.
63.  AaRICULTUIlAL  ENGINEERINO,  BUILDINGS,  MOTIVE POWERS,  FIELD  ENGINES,  MACHINERY,  AND IMPLEMENTS,  by  G.  H.  Andrews.    3^.
77*.  ECONOMY  OF  FUEL,  by  T.  S.  Prideaux.    Is,
80*.  EMBANKING  LANDS  FROM  THE  SEA,  by  J.  Wiggins.  2s.
82.  WATER  POWER,  as  applied  to  Mills,  &c.,  by  J.  Glynn.     2^,
82**.  GAS  WORKS  AND  MANUFACTURING  COAL  GAS,  by S.  Hughes.    38,
82***.  WATER-WORKS  FOR  CITIES  AND  TOWNS,  by  S, Hughes.    38,
117.  SUBTERRANEOUS  SURVEYING,  AND  RANGING  THE
LINE  without  the  Magnet,  by  T.  Fenwick,  with  Additions by  T.Baker.    28,  ed.
118,  CIVIL    ENGINEERING    OF  NORTH  AMERICA,  by  D-
Stevenson.    3s.
120.  HYDRAULIC  ENGINEERING,  by  G.  R.  Burnell.    3s.
121.  RIVERS    AND    TORRENTS,   and  a  Treatise  on   NAVI-
GABLE CANALS  AND  RIVERS  THAT  CARRY  SAND AND  MUD,  fromtheitalian  of  Paul  Frisi.    2*.  6d,
125.  COMBUSTION  OF  COAL,  AND  THE  PREVENTION OF  SMOKE,  by  C.  Wye  WilUams,  M.I.C.E.    3s,
SHIP-BUILDINQ    AND    NAVIGATION.
51.  NAVAL  ARCHITECTURE,  by  J.  Peake."  a?.
53*.  SHIPS  FOR  OCEAN  AND  RIVER  SERVICE,  Construction of,  by  Captain  H.  A.  Sommerfeldt.    Is.
53**.  ATLAS  OF  15  PLATES  TO    THE  ABOVE,  Drawn  for Practice.    4to.    7«.  Qd.
54.  MASTING,  MAST-MAKING,  and  RIGGING   OF    SHIPS, by  R.  Kipping.     Is,  Qd.
54*.  IRON  SHIP-BUILDING,  by  J.  Grantham.    25.  Qd. VIRTUE  BROTHERS  &  CO.,  1,  AMEN  CORNER.
NEW  SERIES  OF  EDUCATIONAL  WORKS.  7
54**.  ATLAS  OF  24  PLATES  to  the  preceding.    4to.    22^.  Qd.
55.  NAVIGATION ;  the  Sailor's  Sea  Book:  How  to  Keep  the  Log and  Work  it  off,  &c.;  Law  of  Storms,  and  Explanation  of Terms,  by  J.  Greenwood.    2s,
80.  aiAEINE  ENGINES,  AND  STEAM  VESSELS,  AND  THE SCREW,  by  R.  Murray.    2s.  6d,
83  bis,  SHIPS  AND  BOATS,  Forms  of,  by  W.  Bland.     Is,
99.  NAUTICAL  ASTRONOMY  AND  NAVIGATION,  by  J.  R.
Young.    2s,
100*.  NAVIGATION  TABLES,  for  Use  with  the  above.    Is,  6d, 106.  SHIPS'  ANCHORS  for  all  SERVICES,  by  G.  Cotsell.    Is.  6d, 140.  SAILS  AND  SAIL-MAKING,  by  R.  Kipping,  N.A.    2.^  Qd.
ARITHMETIC  AND   MATHEMATICS.
6.  MECHANICS,  by  Charles  Tomlinson.    Is.
32.  MATHEMATICAL  INSTRUMENTS,  THEIR  CONSTRUC- TION, USE,  &c.,  by  J.F.  Heather.    Is.
61*.  READY  RECKONER  for  the  Measurement  of  Land,  Tables of  Work  at  from  2s.  Qd,  to  205.  per  acre,  and  yaluation  of Land  from  j61  to  £1,000  per  acre,  by  A.  Arman.     Is.  6d.
76.  GEOMETRY,  DESCRIPTIVE,  with  a  Theory  of  Shadows  and Perspectiye,  and  a  Description  of  the  Principles  and  Practice of  Isometrical  Projection,  by  J.  F.  Heather.    25.
83.  BOOK-KEEPING  AND  COMMERCIAL  PHRASEOLOGY,
by  James  Haddon.     Is,
84.  ARITHMETIC,  with  numerous  Examples,  by  J.  R.  Young.  ls,6d, 84*.  KEY  TO  THE  ABOVE,  by  J.  R.  Young.    1*.  Qd,
VIRTUE  BROTHERS  &  CO.,  1,  AMEN  CORNER.
«  NEW  SERIES  OF  EDUCATIONAL  WORKS.
85.  EQUATIONAL   ABITHMETIO :  Tables  for  the  Calculation
of  Simple  Interest,  with  Logarithms  for  Oompoimd  Interest, and  Annuities,  by  W.  Hipsley.    2«.
86.  ALGEBRA,  by  J.  Haddon.     2*.
86*.  KEY  AND    COMPANION    TO    THE  ABOVE,  by  J.  R.
Young.     Is,  6d,
88.  EUCLID'S  GEOMETRY,  with  Essay  on  Logic,  by  H.Law.  2*.
90.  GEOMETRY,  ANALYTICAL  AND  CONIC  SECTIONS,  by
J.  Hann.     Is,
91.  PLANE  TRIGONOMETRY,  by  J.  Hann.    1*.
92.  SPHERICAL  TRIGONOMETRY,  by  J,  Hann.  Is.    {The  two
volumes  in  one.    2s,)
93.  MENSURATION,  by  T.  Baker.    1*.
94.  LOGARITHMS,  Tables  of ;  with  Tables  of  Natural  Sines,  Co-
sines, and  Tangents,  by  H.  Law.    2s,  Gd,
97.  STATICS  AND  DYNAliOCS,  by  T.  Baker.    Is.
101.  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS,  by  W.  S.  B.  Woolhouse.     1*.
101*  WEIGHTS    AND    MEASURES    OF    ALL   NATIONS;
Weights  of  Coins,  and  Divisions  of  Time ;  with  the  Principles which  determine  the  Rate  of  Exchange,  by  W.  S.  B.  Wool- house.     Is,  Qd.
102.  INTEGRAL  CALCULUS,  by  H.  Cox.    Is.
103.  INTEGRAL  CALCULUS,  Examples  of,  by  J.  Hann.    1*.
104.  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS,  Examples  of,  with  Solutions,
by  J.  Haddon.    Is,   .
105.  ALGEBRA,   GEOMETRY,  and  TRIGONOMETRY,  First
Mnemonical  Lessons  in,  by  the  Rev.  T.  P.  Kirkman.    Is,  6d.
131.  READY-RECKONER  FOR  MILLERS,  FARMERS,  AND MERCHANTS,  showing  the  Value  of  any  Quantityof  Corn, with  the  Approximate  Value  of  Mill-stones  and  Mill  Work,  is,
136.  RUDIMENTARY  ARITHMETIC,  by  J.  Haddon,  edited  by
A.  Arman.     1^ .  Qd,
137.  KEY  TO  THE  ABOVE,  by  A.  Arman.    1^.  Gd.
147.  STEPPING  STONE  TO  ARITHMETIC,  by  Abraham  Ar-
man, Schoolmaster,  Thurleigh,  Beds.    Is,
148.  KEY  TO  THE  ABOVE,  by  A.  Arman.    Is.
VIRTUE  BROTHERS  &  CO.,  1,  AMEN  CORNER*
NEW  SERIES  OF  EDUCATIONAL  WOBES.
[7%43  Series  is  kept  in  three  styles  of  binding — the  prices  of  each are  given  in  columns  at  the  end  of  the  lines. '\
HISTOBIES,   GRAMMABS,   AND  DICTIONABIES.
a
^•s
1.  ENGLAND,  History  of,  by  W.  B.  Hamilton
5.  GEEECE,  History  of,  by  W.  D.  Hamilton
and  E.  Leyien  .......
7.  KOME,  History  of,  by  E.  Levien
9.  CHRONOLOGY  OF  CIVIL  AND  ECOLB-
siastical    History,    Literature,    Art,    and
Ciyilisation,  from  the  earliest   period  to
the  present  time  
1 1.  ENGLISH  GRAMMAE,  by  Hyde  Clarke    . 11*.  HANDBOOK  OF  COMPARATIVE  PHI-
lology,  by  Hyde  Clarke     .        ,        .        .
12.  ENGLISH   DICTIONARY,   above  100,000
words,  or  50,000  more  than  in  any  existing
work.    By  Hyde  Clarke    ....
  ,  with  Grammar
14.  GREEK  GRAMMAR,  by  H.  C.  Hamilton   .
15.    DICTIONARY,  by  H.  R.  Hamil- ton.   Vol.1.  Greek— English   .
17.     Vol.  2.  English  —  Greek
•  Complete  in  1  vol.
19. 20.
22.
with  Grammar LATIN  GRAMMAR,  by  T.  Goodwin  .
   DICTIONARY,    by    T.    Goodwin.
Vol.  1.  Latin— English      .... Vol.2.  English- Latin
■  Complete  in  1  vol.
with  Grammar
24.  FRENCH  GRAMMAR,  by  G.  L.  Strauss
s.  d. 4  0
2  6 26
26 1  0
1  0
36
1  0
20
2  0 40
1  0
2  0 1  6 36
1  0
s.  d. 5  0
3  6 3  6
3  0
46 6  6
5  0 60
46 5  6
s.d. 5  G
4  0 4  0
40
6  0 60
6  6 6  6
60 60
VIRTUE  BROTHERS  &  CO.,  1,  AMEN  CORNER.
10
NEW  SERIES  OF  EDUCATIONAL  WORKS.
IIISTOEIES,  GBAMMAUS,   AND  DICTIONAHIES.
24.
25. 26.
FRENCH  GRAMMAE,  by  G.  L.  Strauss    .
     DICTIONARY,    by    A.   Elwes.
Vol.  1.  French— English  .        .        .        . Vol.  2.  English— French
•  Complete  in  1  toI.
with  Grammar
27.  ITALIAN  GRAMMAR,  by  A.  Elwes  .
28.       TRIGLOT    DICTIONARY,   by
A.   Elwes.    Vol.  1.  Italian  — English  —
French
30. 32.
•3-4. S5.
•  Vol.  2.  English— Italian— French .  Vol.  3.  French— Italian— English -  Complete  in  1  vol.
,  with  Grammar
SPAJ^ISH  GRAMMAR*  by  A.  Elwes  .   ENGLISH    AND    ENGLISH- SPANISH  DICTIONARY,  by  A.  Elwes  . ■ —  >,  with  Grammar
39. 40. 41.
42.
GERMAN  GRAMMAR,  by  G.  L.  Strauss   READER,  from  best  Authors
  TRIGLOT   DICTIONARY,  by
N.  E.  Hamilton.  VoL  1.  English— Ger- man— French  
  Vol.  2.  German — English— French
  Vol.  3.  French — English— German
   Complete  in  1  toI.
  '   ,  with  Grammar
4^1
40.
HEBREW  DICTIONARY,  by  Dr.  Breslan. Vol.  1.  Hebrew— EngUsh  ^    .
  J  ^i^h  Grammar
Vol.  2.  EngHsh— Hebrew
  Complete,  with  Grammar,  in  2  vols.
46».      GRAMMAR,  by  Dr.  Breslau     .
47.  FRENCH  AND  ENGLISH  PHRASE  BOOX
/
8.d. 1   0
1  0
1  6
2  6
1  0
20 20 20
1  0 40
1  0 1  0
1  0 1  0 1  0 30
60 7  0 30
1  0 1  0
«.  d.
36 46
76
86
50 60
40 50
12  0
_
VIRTUE  BROTHERS  &  CO.,  1,  AMEN  CORNER.
GREEK  ASD  LATIN  CLASSICS.  11
OBEEE  AND  LATIN  CLASSICS.
VTith  Explanatory  Kotfet  in  English,  principally  selected  from  tlio best  German  Commentators.
LATIN    SERIES.
1.  LATIN   DELECTUS,  with  Vocabularies  and  Notes,  by
H.  Tomig    la.
2.  CESAR'S  GALLIC  WAR ;  Notes  by  H.  Young      .       .  2».
3.  COENELIUS  NEPOS;  Notes  by  H.  Young     .        .        .  U.
4.  VIRQIL.    The  Georgics,  Bucolics ;  Notes  by  W.  Bushton
and  H.  Young   •        .    1«.
5.  VrftGIL'S  ^NETD ;  Notes  by  H.  Young         .        .        .2s,
6.  HORACE.    Odes  and  Epodes;  Notes,  Analysis  and  Ex-
planation of  Metres   Is,
7.  HORACE.    Satires  and  Epistles ;  Notes  by  W.  S.  Smith  Is.  6^.
8.  SALLUST.    Catiline^  JugurOia ;  Notes  by  W.  M.  Donne  Is.  6d,
9.  TERENCE.    Andria  and  Heautontimorumenos ;  Notes  by
J.  Dayies   ls,Qd,
10.  TERENCE.    Adelphi,  Hecyra,  and  Phormio;  Notes  by  J.
Dayies   2s,
14.  CICERO.   De  Amicitia,  de  Senectute,  and  Brutus ;  Notes  by
W.  B.  Smith   2s.
16.  LIVY.    Part  I.    Books  i.,  ii.,  by  H.  Young      .        .       Is.  Qd.
16*.     Part  II.    Books  iii.,  iv.,  v.,  by  H.  Young     .       Is,  Od.
17.   •    Part  III.    Books  rsi.,  rrii.,  by  W.  B.  Smith         .     1*.
19.  CATULLUS,    TIBULLUS,  OVID,  and  PROPERTIUS,
Selections  from,  by  W.  M.  Donne  .        .        .        .    2^.
20.  SUETONIUS  and  the  later  Latin  Writers,  Selections  from,
byW.  M.Donne   25.
11.  CICERO.    Orations  against  Catiline,  for  Sulla,  for  Arcliias,
and  for  the  Mcnilk ji  Law;
12.  CICERO.   First  and  Second  Philippics ;  Orations  for  Mile,  for
Marcellus,  &c.
13.  CICERO.    De  Offioiis.
16.  JUVENAL  and  PERSIUS.    (The  ipdelicate  passages  expunged.) 18.  TACITUS.   Agricola;  Germania;  and  Annals,  Booki.
VIRTUE  BROTHERS  ds  CO.,  1,  AMEN  CORNER.
12
GREEK  AND  LATIN  CLASSICS.
2. 3*.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9. 10. 11. 12.
13. 14. 16. 16. 17. 18. 20. 23. 26. 30. 32. 40. 41.
GREEK    SERIES^
ON  A  SIUILAB  PLAN  TO  THE  LATIN  SEBIES.
GREEK  INTRODUCTORY   READER,  by  H,  Young.
On  the  same  plan  as  the  Latin  Reader    . XENOPHON.    Anabasis,  i.  ii.  iii.,  bv  H.  Young XENOPHON.    Anabasis,  iv.  v.  vi.  Tii.,  by  H.  Young LTJCIAN.    Select  Dialogues,  by  T.  H.  L.  Leary HOMER.    Hiad,  i.  to  vi.,  by  T.  H.  L.  Leary      . HOMER.    lUad,  yii.  to  xii.,  by  T.  H.  L.  Leary HOMER.    Hiad,  xiii.  to  xviii.,  by  T.  H.  L.  Leary HOMER.    Iliad,  xix.  to  xxiv.,  by  T.  H.  L.  Leary HOMER.    Odyssey,  i.  to  vi.,  by  T.  H.  L.  Leary HOMER.    Odyssey,  vii.  to  xii.,  by  T.  H.  L.  Leary HOMER.     Odyssey,  xiii.  to  xviii.,  by  T.  H.  L.  Leary HOMER.    Odyssey,  xix.  to  xxiv. ;  and  Hymns,  by  T.  H.
2s,
2s,
Is,  6d.
L.  Leary PLATO.     Apology,  Crito,  and  Phoedo,  by  J.  Davies HERODOTUS,  i.  ii.,  by  T.  H.  L.  Leary     . HERODOTUS,  iii.  iv.,  by  T.  H.  L.  Leary HERODOTUS,  v.  vi.  vii.,  by  T.  H.  L.  Leary      . HERODOTUS,  viii.  ix.,  and  Index,  by  T.  H.  L.  Leary SOPHOCLES;  (Edipus  Tyrranus,  by  H.  Young SOPHOCLES ;  Antigone,  by  J.  Mihier      . EURIPIDES ;  Hecuba  and  Medea,  by  W.  B.  Smith EURIPIDES;  Alcestis,  by  J.  Mihier jESCHYLUS;  Prometheus  Vinctus,  by  J.  Davies ^SCHYLUS ;  Septem  contra  Thebas,  by  J.  Davies
ARISTOPHANES;  Acharnians,  by  C.  g THUCYDIDES,  i.,  by  H.  Young
'    Preparinff  for  Press,
.  D.  Townshend  Is.  6c^. •         f         ,     Is.
19.  SOPHOCLES;  GEdipus  Co- lonaeus.
21.  SOPHOCLES ;  Ajax.
22.  SOPHOCLES;  Philootetes. 25.  EURIPIDES;  Hippolytus. 27.  EURIPIDES ;  Orestes. 2S.  EURIPIDES.    Extracts
from  the  remaining  plays.
20.  SOPHOCLES.    Extracts from  the  remaining  plays.
31.  ^SCHYLUS;  Persa. 33.  ^SCHYLUS;  Choephorse.
34.  ^SCHYLUS ;  Eumenides.
35.  ^SCHYLUS;  Agamemnon.
36.  ^SCHYLUS;  Supplices.
37.  PLUTARCH;  Select  Lives.
38.  ARISTOPHANES;  Clouds.
39.  ARISTOPHANES;  Frogs.
42.  THUCYDIDES,  ii.
43.  THEOCRITUS;  Select Idyls.
44.  PINDAR. 46.  ISOCRATES. 46.  HESIOD,
VIRTUE  BROTHERS  &  CO.,  1,  AMEN  CORNER,
/
/  0
<>:^S.  VIKTTJE  BSOIEEBS  &  CO.,  1,  Amen  Corner,  Patenxoiter  Bow.  J^d
SSt                         ON  ECONOMY  OF  FUEL,  ^d
felr^c"  Partioularly  with  reference  to  Eeverberatory  FurDaces  for  the  ji-^-'J^j
i-r^^                     Manufacture  of  Iron,  and  to  Steam  Boilers*  ^-)'*Cj
SVcr                           By  T.  SYMES  PEIDEAUX,  Esq.  B-^^-'^
m             '-»■-  m
>:^  The  Practice  of                                *  %.X^^
1^1  EMBANKING  LANDS  FEOM  THE  SEA,  f^^
W^  Treated  as  a  Means  of  Profitable  Employment  of  Capital.    With   '^^fi
>?5c!^  Examples  and  Particulars  of  actual  Embankments,  ,-*-''a]
^JX^  and  also  Practical  Remarks  on  the  Repair  of  old  Sea  Walls.  '-ct^-l
^rA-  By  JOHN  WIGGINS,  F.G.S.  ^:'h
^  Price  2b.  Vi!:^
A  Rudimentary  Treatise  of  «^^
4^  THE  POWER  OF  WATER,  M.
~^^,<^    As  applied  to  drive  Flour  Mills,  and  to  give  Motion  to  Turbines  ''^'}} >Ca^  *        and  other  Hydrostatic  Engines.  ^j
^j^  By    JOSEPH     GLYNN,      F.R.S.  ^J^l
i
^?i^^  GAS-WORKS,
^jrj  With  an  Appendix  on  Centrifugal  and  Rotary  Pumps.  *cfl^
^;r£  Illustrated.    Price  28.  f^)i
0  —  -        1^^^
i^'ffl  A  Treatise  on  -'^i"
^.'J*^  OAS-WOEKS,  '^^i
1'£tS  And  the  Practice  op  Manufacturing  and  Distributing  Coal  Gas  :  Jf.ll
^S^  With  some  Account  of  the  most  Improved  Methods  of  Distilling  jtr^
5^^^'^  Coal  in  Iron,. Brick,  and  Clay  Retorts,  and  of  the  various  modes  r^'^
^^^S  adopted  for  Purifying  Coal  Gas.    Including  also  a  chapter  on  the  'r^y
^fjt^  Hydrocarbon  or  Water  Gas,  and  on  the  Rating  of  Gaa-workfl  in  ^1
^jf2.  Parochial  Assessments.  o!^^
^<tAa  By  SAMUEL  HUGHES,  CivU  Engineer.  i^y
^^  niustrated.  ^-
^%     ^
^^-%  A  Treatise  on  ^-
^^  WATERWORKS,
^5^.  For  the  Supply  op  Cities  and  Towns.  Zy  ,
^j^  With  a  Description  of   the  principal  Geological  Formations  of  ^l
^^^^•,  England,  as  influencing  Supplies  of  Water;  details  of  Engines  i^C1
?^3?^  and  Pumping  Machinery  for  raising  Water,  and  descriptions  of  K?
v5^  Works  which  have  been  executed  for  procuring  Water  from  Wells,  r^^,
>-VS;^  Rivers,  Springs,  and  Drainage  Areas.  ^^J
^'55  By  SAMUEL  HUGHES,  F.G.S.  if:,
g.^3??  lUustrated.    Ss.  ^S-^
^r^^      .    ^y^
<X^t^-  VIETUE  BROTHERS  &  CO.,  1,  Amen  Comer,  Paternoster  Bow.  ^^o
Uol-
UEIENCE  J.IBRARY
TMs  book  should  be  returned  t( the  Library  on  or  before  the  last  dati stamped  below,
A  fine  of  five  cents  a  day  is  inourred' by  retaining  it  beyond  the  specified time.
Please  return  promptly.
AUG  JpJJDH  "
II
3  2044  056  166  028
^  — . .  —
